, ines I CeomecogPeDe a ee eei. oea.
eaeioe: Cy:
-a: rr rR' Esoehy Be
-eaea SI Eea ee Coe oe soe a ala~ e osPe ae ee, i 9x LCPo RR”; a4 o)hePoe eo!
St Agog ee{O ae; Ce BAER OM a” t a7. g“i (ie iPo a foreIa”a eeof ee fdheYe Aeyme- ee
TMnaiiniaiinneapaa iATe foett ICe - eh heo oe Aa oS eet fqP4eeaCoecor eas Sees fag; ageiei fF, s I 78 oo) Ce tiMO BS. oe ee Oe
(a- yee fo ym Ee i. 2 oe oe ee etoeo Ag ht mm.. ~ OR ee ea i ed eeoerere” 6bE ong oe a aeGe elani mney EP SUR ae Ee:
Peqreeoc Ss. see gee ee eeeSee Iees Ese PRUs DBO oes t
>, Sal Pe es I I oe oo
SS I. 6g: iSe ee I oe as im (I: waeoo oe: egeee ee:
SA Gigs BE Ua Demers CRUG se eeo oh VE ne Bes Paki Oe Cee nN TennerES ee. an ee Se ioe co iby etersiOa EGE Fo ae eas a:. te pe a -aoo. fe RO Boe eeeY ee ee ae i Sedh hes oa a ee Gee SSos cu eo eee a Sa ee ie:: iOE ee ee Ne Seu ilaieotkes F5~
Moe rm, es eee os eo co s. FAS AL DRE 8 ia aN A he ee Vee BosEO ee Se oe meeQe ae a ee ee BU os peg ee en pha e.‘ ae le Pee ase hr, eeSa aati ae ee NE Ses seas, Bb ae ie on ge RR Gl oe ide, Mabe vie4SEER Pe eee. SRI Bes eae ee ree‘«.
CORRE SA LOI ec Be ee ie Ne ey ne PASSO NDRese kel Oe: UDI Ghee as.:
a oe Oe es OU a Bea, Soe ee ee ee oe Co ee ee: Dees es HO oe ee oe moe # a ce co.. Iaa oe oe ee Tee:é
Bie Ce ee eos eS Bea Leen ee ee ECR BORE Sa ee ee CE SECRETE ea SER EVES ee oewy pga hues Sen Ste ae va nea Cs oe ee Ly aes eee age..
sg Oe ee ee ee ONE rr EEE NS OR ce he eneo Py‘
Sea oy ee DU ae a hee ee a oe eee Be Se er rem. oeres, pee RE a Pe uae So BA eee ee eee ea SHOR eneaN OR as Ne SUPERS Ea EGE RHEE LR LEN Se SN Seat eae ay eee eaeJeetB
Ps Pe oe: a aD ee eechoosy
Vea ss Sane Si ee se oS Poe ER a LOA en anne ee eh se je ese a ce DUR OR SSO A OO I Be ene ee ee: SNES-:
NaS aie Le Oa aan Se UN a tieaa ede a Pe ca ee es SENDS a ROS NUS GEN Or DSBseen}i eee oe oo ae EE ck; ee ee PE CE De peeLABOUR’S WAY OUT, re tel Ad? Y }_. oe? ogacl ole orn
FOREWORDe
By Harold Wilsonoo
Leader of the Labour Party~
II welcome this ElectionI welcome, more than anything else, this opportunity for the British people to give their verdict upon the last three years and eight months of
Conservative Government. Let the people vote; let us workoo.
together again.
I.! y ':.<
This Manifesto was published by the Labour Party.
National Executive Committee and Parliamentary Committee on ll January last. Since then the situation has deteriorated gravely, and the nation knows it is in crisis. This is Labour’sfunk policy for that crisis-and to this we pledge ourselves whenjeo elected. Ee bs
The Government called this election in panic. They areéeos unable to govern, and dare not tell the people the truth. ee eee
IO le fi ies of interlocking crises. Priie I ur people face a series of interlocking crises. Prices areSee ee rocketing. The Tories have brought the country to the edgeeee of bankruptcy and breakdown. More and more people are; a os.
losing their jobs. Firms are going out of business. Housingpes ae SS; costs are out of reach for so many families. The Commona.
Market now threatens us with still higher food prices andae vag ae eae, SE aR vot:
TTT eee eeeny ee pe mane nn ee a Eran Oea ee - oe vo ee.
ee a a -. 4 Bee ee 2 De ae:‘
ON ee eeeme ee ee Deeva 8:- oe le oe i oo ee EG oe ee eeawn o-/
Ce OC ee ay De a eeea; coe rrr -~-rT"Noe
Sf ae ee ee ne ee een.;
OT Ee Ne ee ee ee iy RON Ge te eee eeeismo
Fe a oe Oe el rsCW BU Deg BS a ceaa,; a r ee i ee:.
oe ee pe: oe
Pe ee ee ee ceeRe i ee ee eeLh ROSEN RUE Ss Ul aa ae BU EI ge NES Bee SSE;:
es oe i ee A oe a ee ee Gere cr neé:
ee ees“a ce“
HE a CR as Me es Cp a Ge ORG SU ts es I aes ci cage hyoe
Bi ccc ek eeoe
UU 522O65 2OS eo oe ek'7: with a further loss of Britain’s control of its own affairs. WeBritain needs a new Government, and the Labour Party is shall restore to the British people the right to decide theready with the policies essential to rescue the nation from the final issue of British membership of the Common Market. most serious political and economic crisis since l945. We do
The British people were never consulted about the Market. thes say that the dangers confronting us can be quickly
Even more, the country was deceived in l97O about theIsp elled; rising prices and housin 8 costs and the new threat to
Government's intentions on jobs and prices. They will not beour livelihood from the world-wide oil crisis cannot be held in deceived again. Today the people of Britain know thatcheck at a stroke. We do say that the problems cut so deep that reasonable leadership by Government can achieve anthe solutions must cut deep also. The sooner Labour gets the honourable settlement of the mining dispute and get thechance to heal the savage wounds inflicted upon our society in country back to work. Only stubborn refusal by an arrogantrecent year's, and to turn the hopes and exertions of our people
Conservative administration stands in our way. in a new direction, the better for the nation as a whole.
The new Labour Government will see that the presentIn this sense, we face not merely economic perils of a new dispute is settled by negotiation. We shall control prices anddimension; we face a crowning test of our democracy - attack speculation and set a climate fair enough to workwhether we can show the resilience, the ingenuity, the together with the unions. courage, the imagination, the sense of community necessary to meet these economic perils.
This Election is not about the miners. They are in the firing line today. The housewife has been in the firing lineThe Labour Party is proud of the contribution we made to the ever since Mr. Heath was elected. Let us now choose anation’s salvation at critical times in our history, and itis in the
Government willing to face up to Britain’s problems; letsame mood that we approach the interlocking crises of the us elect a Government of all the people; let us work together. l97O’s.
Immediately, for the vast majority of families, the economic crisis takes the form of fear for their jobs, ever-rising prices,
HA ROL DWIL SONparticularly food prices, and ever-rising housing costs, particularly council rents and high mortgage rates, coupled with the most drastic cuts in their income which our people have experienced since the l93O’s - caused by the three-day, working week introduced in panic by Government decree on
January l. For the nation the economic crisis involves an; appalling balance of payments deficit, mounting debt and an ever sinking pound.
Apparently, the aim of the Prime Minister is to continue the scourge of the three-day week until he has secured a political victory over the miners. He scolds them as national enemies at
EEE EOE eOo7_o ee aeTT a the very moment when their services are more than everGovernment intervention in the allocation of precious energy indispensable to the nation. The folly of this style of politicsresources would be willingly accepted by the community as a passes description. But one day soon the Government willwhole..
_ have to make a settlement with the miners; let us hope theFirst, and with the utmost urgency, the coal industry must be clash has not by then become so bitter that the long-termgiven a new status, perspective, and security. In particular, prospect of sustaining an effective coal industry is fatallythe case which the National Union of Mineworkers has long impaired. presented is now more than ever seen to be in the national interest. A Labour Government will give the mining industry
The Tory Legacythe backing it needs to revise its plans on a more ambitious
The longer the Conservative Government survives the morescale. Immediately, the present Government should set up a desperate the situation a Labour Government will inherit. TheCommission, composed of representatives of the NCB, the
British people will understand if we are then compelled to giveNUM, and the Government itself, to reexamine the so absolute a priority to rebuilding the economic fabric of theindustry’s future, including distribution, in the light of the new nation that some of our expenditure will have to be delayed. necessities, and to report within three months.
The graver our economic situation the more important It willSecond, the new situation has greatly strengthened Labour’s be to protect the poorer membe rs of the community - such asdetermination to ensure not only that the North Sea and Celtic the pensioners - by a drastic redistribution of wealth andSea oil and gas resources are in full public ownership, but that income. However, the nature of the crisis will require that thethe operation of getting and distributing them is under full structural changes we propose should be made even moreGovernment control with majority public participation. We urgently. cannot accept that the allocation of available world output
Whatever the circumstances in which we take office, we shallshould continue to be made by multi-national oil companies still have to meet the menaces of the mounting price of oil, of aand not by Governments. We will not permit Britain’s own:£2, OOO million deficit on the balance of payments, and of evenresources to be parcelled out in this way. Itis public ownership
Imore rapidly rising prices. How Labour will tackle thatand control that will enable the British people, through its long-standing challenge of inflation naturally forms a centralGovernment, to fix the pace of exploitation of our oil, and the: part of this document. But let us consider first the energyuse to which it is put, so as to secure maximum public crisis. advantage from our own resources.;. Third, a British Government should take the initiative to set
The Energy Crisis. up an International Energy Commission. Such a body,
IA huge addition is now being made to the price Britain mustdesigned to establish a rational international allocation of
‘Ipay for oil from the Middle East and elsewhere, includingavailable oil resources, together with research into new forms iheavy additional burdens on the balance of payments. Everyof fuel, should represent not only the industrialised nations but _ -
Iavailable step must be taken to enforce the most efficient usealso the developing countries, which are bound to suffer most of fuel and this must clearly be decided on a national scale. cruelly.
$$ rn rraEEE EEE SFourth, the energy crisis has further profound implications forhave been paid for by price rises for the rest of us. We now the way we conduct our whole transport system. If we are tohave the lowest house building programme since l963 conserve precious fuel we must do two things: one, move ascombined with rampant inflation in rents and house prices.
much traffic as possible from road to rail; and two, developWages are controlled whilst unearned incomes and capital public transport to make us less dependent on the private car. values soar. The banks have doubled their profits through the
This will involve large scale investment in railways, tubes andrecord interest rates their customers have to pay. l974 will buses and a fares policy which puts the needs of the travellingcertainly produce the biggest balance of payments deficit in public first. our history.
Fifth, the oil crisis is only one example of the problems which confront all nations in connection with the exploitation of theThe Common Market finite natural resources of raw materials of the earth. A LabourBritain is a European nation, and a Labour Britain would
Government must cooperate internationally to use carefullyalways seek a wider cooperation between the European the world’s resources in the long-term public interest of bothpeoples. But a profound political mistake made by the Heath the developing and developed nations and to reject the presentGovernment was to accept the terms of entry to the CommonI concepts of profiteering exploitation. Market, and to take us in without the consent of the British people. This has involved the imposition of food taxes onI top of rising world prices, crippling fresh burdens on our
THE UNDERLYING CRISIS __. balance of payments, and a draconian curtailment of the power
Three years ago when Labour was in power, Britain had a bigof the British Parliament to settle questions affecting vital and growing surplus on the balance of payments. MortgageBritish imterests. This is why a Labour Government will rates stood at 8l4 per cent; Labour had built two million housesimmediately seek a fundamental renegotiation of the terms of
Iin six years; and the rise in the cost of living had been heldentry.
down to less than 5 per cent a year. Today interest rates are atWe have spelled out in ‘Labour’s Programme for Britain’ our record high levels, and house-building is at its lowest for moreobjectives in the new negotiations which must take place:
than ten years. The cost of living has gone up by lO per cent a‘The Labour Party opposes British membership of the year and food prices have risen by no less than l8 per cent inEuropean Communities on the terms negotiated by the one year. Conservative Government.
The present Government came to office with promises of‘“We have said that we are ready to renegotiate.
lower taxation, stable prices, reduced unemployment and‘‘In preparing to renegotiate the entry terms, our main increased fimancial strength. Three years later we have. objectives are these:
experienced a 2O per cent devaluation of the pound (or aMajor changes in the COMMON AGRICULTURAL POLICY, so float dow nwards of that extent); unemployment has beenthat it ceases to be a threat to world trade in food products, over a million and is Now ising again, prices have risen fasterand so that low-cost producers outside Europe can continue than at any time in living memory; and tax cuts for the richto have access to the British food market.
a ND eeeI sssaB. ouEe és.. expressed approval of the majority of the British people, mantel methods Oe ening the COMMUNthen we shat be ready to play our full part in developing a resources’ of the Communities, nor the purposes, mainly« new an wi er EUFOpe. h agricultural support, on which the funds are mainly to beIf renegotiations do not succeed, we shall not regard the spent, are acceptable to us. We would be ready to contributeTreaty obligations as binding upon us. We shall then put to to Community finances only such sums as were fair inthe British people the reasons why we find the new terms relation to what is paid and what is received by other. unaccept able, and consult them on the advis ability of member countries._ hegotiating our withdrawal from the Communities.
‘As stated earlier, we would reject any kind of internationalAg incoming Labour Government willimmediately setin train agreement which compelled us to accept increasedthe procedures designed to achieve an early result and whilst unemployment for the sake of maintaining a fixed parity, asthe negotiations proceed and until the British people have is required by current proposals for a European ECONOMICvoted, we shall stop further processes of integr ation,
AND MONETARY UNION. We believe that the monetaryparticularly as the y affect fi ood taxes. The Government will be:. free to take decisions, subject to the authority of Parliament, in problems of the European countries can be resolved only incases where decisions of the Common Market prejudge the a world-wide framework. negotiations. Thus, the right to decide the final issue of British
Baek etention by re led to O of those P tive. over theentry into the Market will be restored to the British people.
ritish economy needed to pursue effective regional,.
industrial and fiscal policies. Equally we need an agreementSocial Justice on capital movements which protects our balance ofClearly, a fresh approach to the British crisis is required, and payments and full employment policies. The economicLabour insists that it must begin with an entirely new interests of the COMMONWEALTH and the DEVELOPINGrecognition of the claims of social justice.; securing co ninae ren ean oe a nd. anesTo that end, urgent action is needed to tackle rising prices; to qgenerally, the adoption by an enlarged Community of tradestrike at the roots of the worst poverty, to make the aor try
7and aid policies designed to benefit not just ‘‘associateddemonstrably a much fairer place to live fit or t dot
-overseas territories’ in Africa, but developing countriespurposes, a new Labour Government, in its first period o dthroughout the world.. office, will:_
‘‘No harmonisation of VALUE ADDED TAX which wouldl Bring immediate help to existing PENSIONERS, widows, the
Irequire us to tax necessities. sick and the unemployed by increasing pensions and ote
£“If renegotiations are successful, it is the policy of the Labourvonvie. ° ore fret Poslinmentary, voncion vot Our
Party that, in view of the unique importance of the decision, Government. Thereafter these figures will be increased the people should have the right to decide the issue through aannually in proportion to increases in average national
‘General Election or a Consultative Referendum. If theseearnings. We shall also follow this by replacing the two tests are passed, a successful renegotiation and the,.
6aEE EEEEEEEETIESSSSS cr
Conservative Government’s inadequate and unjustownership of land will stop land profiteering. It will long-term pensions scheme by a comprehensive schemeemphatically not apply to owner-occupiers.
designed to take future pensioners off the means test and6 REDISTRIBUTE INCOME AND WEALTH. We shall introduce an give full equality of treatment to women. annual Wealth Tax on the rich; bring in a new tax on major
2 Introduce a new scheme of help for the DISABLED. transfers of personal wealth; heavily tax speculation in. ae. roperty - including a new tax on property companies; and
3 Help the low paid and other families in poverty byjseek to eliminate tax dodging across the whole field, introducing a new system of CHILD CASH ALLOWANCES for\ every child, including the first, payable to the mother...
Industrial Relations
4 Introduce strict PRICE CONTROL on key services andThese measures affecting prices and taxation policy will commodities. Bulk purchase and new marketingprove by deeds the determination of the new Labour arrangements will help stabilise food prices, and selectiveGovernment to set Britain on the road towards a new social use of subsidies will be applied to the items bearing most. and economic equality. After so many failures in the field of heavily on the family budget. We shall renegotiate thoseincomes policy - under the Labour Government but even elements of Common Market policy which deliberatelymore seriously under the Tory Government’s compulsory impose food taxes on the people. wage controls - only deeds can persuade. Only practical
-. action by the Government to create a much fairer
5 Repeal the HOUSING FINANCE ACT, and give back to localdistribution of the national wealth can convince the worker authorities the right to fix rents which do not make a profitand his family and his trade union that ‘‘an incomes policy” out of their tenants. We shall extend protection fromis not some kind of trick to force him, particularly if he eviction to tenants of furnished accommodation; limit rentworks in a public service or nationalised industry, to bear increases in unfurnished and furnished lettings; encouragethe brunt of the national burden. But as it is proved that the the municipalisation of privately rented property (exceptGovernment is ready to act - against high prices, rents and where an owner-occupier shares a house with a tenant); andother impositions falling most heavily on the low paid and on take steps to secure a steady supply of mortgage funds atpensioners - so we believe that the trade unions voluntarily reasonable rates of interest to those wishing to buy their own(which is the only way it can be done for any period in a free homes; and abolish the agricultural tied cottage. We shallsociety), will cooperate to make the whole policy raise the total subsidy for local authority house building to}successful. We believe that the action we propose on prices, I that granted to owner-occupiers on their mortgagetogether with an understanding with the TUC on the lines payments. This will be vital to reversing the serious fall in)which we have already agreed, will create the right the housing programme under the present Government. economic climate for money incomes to grow in line withI
Land required for development will be taken into publicproduction. That is the essence of the new social contractI ownership, so that land is freely and cheaply available forwhich the Labour Party has discussed at length and agreed new houses, schools, hospitals and other purposes. Publicwith the TUC and which must take its place as a central
89I
Goveament SY Seonomic policy of a Labourmineral rights. We shall also take shipbuilding,: ship-repairing and marine engineering, ports, the
A Labour Government will, therefore: manufacture of airframes and aeroengines into public
(i) Abolish the PAY BOARD apparatus set up by the Tories. ownership and control. But we shall not confine the
(ii) Repeal the INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS ACT as a matter ofextension of the public sector to loss making and subsidised extreme urgency and then bring in an Employment°industries. We shall also take over profitable Sections or
Protection Act and an Industrial Democracy Act, as; individual firms in those industries where a public holding is agreed in our discussions with the TUC, to increase the. essential to enable the Government to control prices, control of industry by the people. employment, protect workers. and consumers from the
-.:. ent, protect workers
(iii) Establish a standing ROYAL COMMISSION to advise onactivities of irresponsible multi-national companies, and to income distribution, both earned and unearned, withplan the national economy in the national interest. We shall particular reference to differentials and job evaluation. therefore include in this operation, sections of
(iv) Establish a non-governmental CONCILIATION ANDpharmaceuticals, road haulage, construction, machine
ARBITRATION SERVICE, with the task of tackling industrialtools, in addition to our proposals for North Sea and Celtic disputes at both national and local level. Sea oil and gas. Our decision in the field of banking, insurance and building societies is still under consideration.. We shall return to public ownership assets and licences
Employment and Expansionhived-off by the present government, and we shall create a
However, more will be needed if we are to create a new spirit inpowerful National Enterprise Board with the structure and industry. The British people, both as workers and consumers, functions set out in ‘Labour’s Programme l973’.
must have more control over the powerful private forces that. a.;;;; at present dominate our economic life. To this end we shall:9 We intend to socialise existing nationalised industries. In
7 Sustain and expand industrial development and exports andconsultation with the anons, WE shall take steps O make the bribout the reequipment necessfor this purposemanagement of existing nationalised industries more ring abouquipcessary Tor Us purporesponsible to the workers in the industry and more through the powers we Shall take in a new INDUSTRY ACTresponsive to their consumers’ needs.
and through the Planning Agreement system which will allow Government to plan with industry more effectively.. lO Regional development will be further encouraged by new
Wherever we give direct aid to a company out of publicpublic enterprise, assistance to private industry on a funds we shall in return reserve the right to take a share of. selective basis, and new REGIONAL PLANNING MACHINERY, the ownership of the company. along the lines set out in ‘Labour’s Programme l973’. We
8 In addition to our plans set out in point 5 above for takingMaamehaae eeu: Seve ane eeion hen ployment ohh cubewa tially vrontend PUstIG eNTeRPMee by takingwherever possible to improve employment conditions in
Scotland and the regions elsewhere in need of development.
lOll
INe.
ll We shall develop an active manpower policy with aproposals have the advantage of bringing benefits at little powerful NATIONAL LABOUR BOARD. In the longer term, economic cost.
redundant workers must have an automatic right tol5 WOMEN AND GIRLS must have an equal status in education, retraining; redundancy should then lead not totraining, employment, social security, national insurance, unemployment, but to retraining and job changing. taxation, property ownership, matrimonial and family law.
°"Women at work, whether wives and mothers or those
Social Progress; oaLo. otherwise caring for dependent relatives, must receive more
These are our measures for transforming British industry into. consideration from the community. We shall create the
- aresponsible economic system. It is outrageous that, at a timepowerful legal machinery necessary to enforce our when enormous private wealth is being accumulated, so littleanti-discrimination laws.
effort has been made to maintain and improve our public. is.
services. A Labour Government will: l6 Review the law of NATIONALITY SO that our immigration
\policies are based on citizenship, and in particular to l2 Revise and expand the NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE; abolisheliminate discrimination on grounds of colour.
prescription charges; introduce free family planning; phasel7 Set up a NATIONAL CONSUMERS AUTHORITY with adequate out private practice from the hospital service; and transformfinance to redress the balance between the consumer and the area health authorities into democratic bodies. the manufacturer and seller.
We also intend to establish a disability benefit.
l3 Expand the EDUCATION SERVICE by the introduction ofaPeace and Justice in a Safer WorldI national scheme of Nursery Schools, including day care facilities, and by a big expansion of educational facilities forAs ” domestic P olicy the lesson of the last few years l l6l8 year olds, by finally ending the ll+ and by providingForeign Policy is th at a narrow, Selfish, inward looking additional resources for children in special need of help. Weapproach to international problems Is doomed to failure. We shall speed the development of a universal system of fullyare, more than ever, one world and Labour s foreign policy comprehensive secondary schools. Ali forms of tax-reliefwill be dedicated to the strengthening of international and charitable status for public schools will be withdrawn. institutions and global cooperation in response to the threa ts to the peace and prosperity of us all. To this end the foreign l4 Pay special attention to the MANPOWER NEEDS Of all public. policy of a new Labour Government will be guided by four services now approaching break-down, particularly in ourmain principles.
inner urban areas. Our cities desperately need and must getOne: We shall seek to strengthen international organisations better services, which are properly manned, and the‘dedicated to the promotion of human rights, the rule of law, resources to make this possible. and the peaceful settlement of disputes. In particular, we shall
Not all of our proposals should be judged on economic tests. Itre-dedicate Britain to the ideals of the United Nations and the is the duty of Socialists to protect the individual fromCommonwealth, two organisations treated with scant regard discrimination on whatever grounds. Here several of ourby the present Government.
l2l3Two: We shall commit Britain to a policy of equality at homeidealism and high intelligence, especially of our young people, and abroad which would involve radical changes in aid, tradecan be enlisted. It is indeed our intention to:
and development policies. In particular, the next Labour;;;_
Government will seek to implement the United Nationsa. Bring about a fundamental and irreversible shift in the
Development Target of O.7 per cent of GNP official aid andbalance of power and wealth in favour of working people will increase the aid programme to meet it, and will actively»and their families; seek to reestablish a more generous and more liberal worldb. Eliminate poverty wherever it exists in Britain, and trading pattern for the developing countries.. commit ourselves to a substantial increase in our
Three: We shall oppose all forms of racial discrimination andcontribution ‘O fight Poverty abroad; colonialism. This will mean support for the liberationc. Make power in industry genuinely accountable to the movements of Southern Africa and a disengagement fromworkers and the community at large;
Britain’s unhealthy involvement with Apartheid. We shall. d. Achieve far greater economic equality - in income, intensify the policy of sanctions against Rhodesia and agree towealth and living standards; no settlement which does not have the whole-hearted consente. Increase social equality by giving far greater importance of the African majority. to full employment, housing, education and social
Four: Whilst maintaining our support for NATO as anbenefits; instrument of detente no less than of defence, we shall, inf. Improve the environment in which our people live and
Iconsultation with our Allies, progressively reduce the burdenwork and spend their leisure.
of Britain’s defence spending to bring our costs into line with those hat present levels of defence spendin » anean cavinesonOf course, as we insisted at the beginning, these aims, like the defence expenditure by Britain of several hundred millionparticuar cannot do certthine st aoe and ye ue a pounds per annum over a period. At the same time we shallpriorities we have chosen. This preliminary manifesto, work for the Success of detente. We shall participate in thedrawing upon the new policy statements which the Labour multilateral disarmament negotiations and as a first step willParty has discussed by its democratic process, over the past seek the removal of American Polaris bases from Greatthree years, sets out the specific numbered pledges which the
Britain. The ultimate objective of the movement towards a‘next Labour Government will seek with all its strength to more satisfactory relationship im Europe must be the mutualcarry out in a single Parliament.
and concurrent phasing out of NATO and the Warsaw Pact..._., The task will not be easy. But we repudiate the despairing
Let the Nation Decidegospel preached in some quarters that the British people
The aims set out in this manifesto are Socialist aims, and wecannot govern themselves and that they have lost the art to act are proud of the word. it is only by setting our aims high, evencohesively, through their various democratic institutions, as a. amid the hazards of our present economic situation, that thecivilised community.
l4l5eeSRT IREEEnEe
That charge comes most insultingly from a ConservativeLABOUR’S PROGRAMME
Government which has adopted so many devices to corrode or destroy the power of those democratic institutions - localFOR BRITAIN l973 authorities, the trade unions, the House of Commons itself.
These are the very instruments which Labour will use toFURTHER COPIES OF THIS PAMPHLET restore and enhance the power of British democracy..
)CAN BE OBTAINED FROM:. THE LITERATURE SALES DEPARTMENT
}THE LABOUR PARTY
TRANSPORT HOUSE. SMITH SQUARE, LONDON SWlP 3JA
AT THE FOLLOWING POST PAID PRICES l copy 3Op25 copies 24p each.6lO copies 2Op each ll and over l6p each
LABOUR PARTY OPPOSITION
GREEN PAPERS at 2Op
Advertising (l972)
Citizenship, Immigration, Integration (l972)
‘Discrimination against Women (l972)
Higher and Further Education (l973). National Enterprise Board (l973)
ICapital and Equality (l973)
Banking and Insurance (l973)
IHealth Care (l973)
I\Le
Pollution and the Environment (l97O) l5p*
Population (l97l) lOp“
The Need for Consumer
Protection (l972) l5p;
The Deprived Child (l973) l5p
Economic Policy and the Cost of Living
(Joint TUC/Labour Party) (l973) 3p
Nationalisation of Shipbuilding, Shiprepair and Marine Engineering (l973)
(Joint CSEU/TUC/Labour Party) 5p
(l973) at 9p}I l. Individual Choice in Democracy.
2. Democracy in Local Affairs
3. Democracy in Industry
-woI/ cot oe moe a wo mt ee oe. ys SS. rtSN pre Ne: a- - I fr 3ile i 7 oo rn ee bod.; iII ppl!
Ti gm The Authent!®I/
Labo IVoice of SocialismI
Give it your wholehearted support in a practical way by placingae“me a regular order with your newsagent. If that is not convenientperhaps you live abroad or don’t have a regular newsagent, write to Literature Sales, Labour Weekly, Transport House
53$
Smith Square, London SWlP 3JA and we will arrange aeecu subscription. Re OG:
YOUR SUPPORT IS VITAL! ACT NOW l!.
LABOUR NEEDS YOUR HELPum.
Published by the Labour Party, Transport House, Smith Square, London, SWlP 3JA and Printed b
Macdermott & Chant Ltd (T. U.) London, Enfield and WelshpoolRef: B.74/4 be oo4 a llrrti-<“iO-OO-OSSSS fis eo ey fOe ee oo eee iee Se: F.
ge ee Saee:: a nee: