I The General Election Mani ‘Buti::{ estosBs aefculties worse. At the se me from the age of the smc.
& transformed by the new te. I:.7gwn almost every Western cc I
2The Conservative Party: F Our opponents claim tha::. r. I:4of millions of pounds. Thr I; igsavage economic crisis thar;6ain its wake. i l he Ch [I«’eeThe truth is that uneme: a enge (@)Oo url imese. reduced only by steadily a> I i; tservices which people wan’ I
What we have achieved I
This is the task to which + I;.. Prices are rising more slov
‘Foreword by Margaret Thatcherlow-inflation nations of the I: i the last four years. Britain has recovered her confidence and self-respect. We have regainedWe are creating the I the regard and admiration of other nations. We are seen today as a people with integrity. res hecontrols on wages. prices I. and the will to succeed.:. building.
This Manifesto describes the achievements of four vears of Conservative government and stsWe have returned to fre; out our plans for our second term.~icustomet and save taxpay< I
The choice before the nation ts stark: either fo continue our present steadfast progress tow ards‘We have cut income tx lantrecovery, of to follow policies more extreme and more damaging than those ever put forward by. We have more than prot. I waany previous Opposition. i.‘Health Service. We have z I
We face three challenges: the defence of our country. the employment of our people. and theWe have strengthened © I prosperity of our economy.. We have done all this. I
How to defend Britain's traditional liberties and distinctive wav of life is the most vital‘control.
decision that faces the people at this election. We have enjoved peace and security for thirty-f_We have paid off near:: eight years ~ peace with treedom and justice. We dare not put that security at risk. Every thinkingbiggest borrower. we are I man and woman wants to get rid of nuclear weapons. To do that we must negotiate patientlyfinance ~ to the Deneft O: I from a position of strength. not abandon ours in advance... And we have acted so) I
The universal problem of our time. and the most intractable. is unemployment. The answerdetermination with which I is not bogus social contracts and government overspending. Both, in the end. destroy jobs. Theworld, Many small aaticr I: only way to a lasting reduction in unemployment is to make the right products at the right prices. heartened by what Bata
4supported by good services. The Government's role ts to keep inflation down and oifer realIOver the past tour yours. incentives for enterprise. As we win back customers. so we win back jobs. jgreat tasks for the future I i”We have a duty to protect the most vulnerable members of our society. many of whom: to create an econom. I
Econtributed to the heritage we now enjoy. We are proud of the way we have shielded theour people:
pensioner and the National Health Service from the recession. Only if we create wealth can we___ to build a responsiby: I continue to do justice to the old and the sick and the disabled. [l is economic success which willindividual to flounsh:
Iprovide the surest guarantee of help for those who need it most. to uphold Parliamen: I aOur history is the story of a free people - a great chain of people stretching back into the pastto improve the qual:
pand forward into the future. Alt are linked by a common belief in freedom. and in Britain'sto defend Britain's agreatness. All are aware of their own responsibility to contribute to both. keep the peace with just. I; Our past is witness to their enduring courage, honesty and flair, and to their ability to change‘These tasks will require ~ I, and create. Our future will be shaped by those same qualities.‘people alike.. b ine task we face is formidable. Together. we have achieved much over the past four years. [‘
~elieve it is now right to ask for a new mandate to meet the challenge of our times:
CeJOBS, PRICES AND Ub I "ivf rece: THE ROAD TO RECOVERYDuring the sea
4Briain is ence more a force to be reckoned with. Formidable difficulties remain to be overcome. ties, the Conservative G I
“Whee our years of aoevative government, national recovery has begun.; toring sound money. sett I j' en we came to office in May l979, our country was suffering both from an economic crisisefficiency to the national.:
Iand a crisis of morale. British industry was uncompetitive, over-taxed, over-regulated and over-unemployment.
manned. me British economy was plagued by inflation. After only a brief artificial pause, it was; The foundations of re. I iouble figures. This country was drifting further and further behind its neighbours.‘i
Defeatism was in the air.8’this progress. I, We did not disguise the fact that putting Britain right would be an extremely difficult task. TheSuccess against inflati: I second sharp oil price increase and the deepest world recession since the l93Os have made those: Steadier prices and honc qnr tAgovernment, prices dout I j. ati.. controls on pr I! The Conservative, Labour and LiberabSDP Alliance mamifestos ain full wi‘{battery of conI; partiesjaneaifestos are published in full with extracts from the manitestos of other3Tod ay. there are ne su
]tl96Os. During the last 4. I
288' \I
PP ee Eo ti Rt OB Bg ek Dt lh Pe Sok SUESots a_aCONSERVATIVE MANIFESTO estosdifficulties worse. At the same time. the Western world is passing through another transformation
~ from the age of the smokestack to the era of the microchip. Traditional industries are being:
transformed by the new technologies. These changes have led to a rapid rise in unemployment
I: in almost every Western country.: Our opponents claim that they could abolish unemployment by printing or borrowing thousands;{of millions of pounds. This is a crue! deceit. Their plans would immediately unleash a far more
‘savage economic crisis than their last: a crisis which would. very soon. bring more unemployment
{in its wake.
s5HThe truth is that unemplovment. in Britain as in other countries. can be checked and then
IrI j me Sreduced only by steadily and patiently rebuilding the economy so that it produces the goods and
‘services which people want to buy. at prices they can afford. ' IWhat we have achieved iThis is the task to which we have steadfastly apphed ourselves with gradually increasing success.
I; Prices are rising more slowly now than at any time for fifteen vears. Britain is now among the. low-inflation nations af the Western world. Output is rising.
Afy~yect. We have regained’We are creating the conditions in which trade and industry can prosper. We have swept away
Lb wah Ig: controls on wages. prices. dividends. foreign exchange. hire purchase. and office and factors
# with integrity. resolveai*::‘building.
ervative government and setsWe have returned to free enterprise many state firms. in order to provide better service to the tcustomer and save taxpayers’ mone\.
WwW5t. r4 iswwe$rels.
ent steadfast progress towards; e have cut income tax rate and rai ed all ances at all levels nan those ever put forward byWe have more than protected pensions against rising prices. We have strengthened the National; Health Service. We have given council tenants the right to buy their own homes.
We have strengthened the police and the armed forces of the Crown wment of our people.';.:_.:
°people. and the: We have done all this and more. and still kept our promise to bring public spending under ta:.‘control.
way of life is the most v'; i peace and security ee thtsWe have paid off nearly half the overseas debts the Labour Party left behind. Once the IMF's ae eich Eacaee thinhinbiggest borrower. we are now playing a leading part in strengthening international trade and security at risk. Every thinkingF7ies ¢ t we must negotiate atientlyifinance - to the benefit of the poorest countries on earth.
gP’; And we have acted so that people might live in freedom and justice. The bravery. skill and is unemployment. The answerdetermination with which Britain's task force recaptured the Falklands reverberated around the aneee re. tworld. Manv smail nations gave thanks for that stand: and our allies in the North Atlantic are m the end. destroy jabs. The.-
~xheartened by what Britain achieved in the South Adanuc nt products at the right prices. Over the past four years. this country has recaptured much of her old pride. Whave five inflation down and offer realer the past four vears. this¥ has recap’Ner old pride. We now have five ck jobsgreat tasks for the future. Thev are:
our society. many of whom; our seo an economy which provides stable prices, lasing prosperity and emplovment for ve way we have shielded the...:.
ly if we create wealth can we: di ‘ce Bulle a responsible society which protects the weak but also allows the family and the s economic success which will: Individual to Hourish.
to uphold Parliamentary democracy and strengthen the rule of law:
te shine back ihto improve the quality of life in our cities and countryside:, A p det ac dinB € pastto defend Britain's freedom. to keep faith with our allies in Europe and in NATO. and to o bath om. and in Briain s. keep the peace with justice.
Iand to their ability to change5These tasks will require sustained determination. imagination and effort from Government and
Ipeopie alike
I. th over the past four vears. I*
I “nee of our times.. JOBS, PRICES AND UNIONS
During the vears of recession. NOW coming to an end. ever the most successful of our competitors have faced increasing! y serious problems and mounting unemplovment. Despite all these difficulculties remain to be overcome. ties. the Conservative Government has been overcoming Britain’s fundamental problems: ress has begun.. toring sound money. setting a better balance between trade unions and the rest of society, bringing both from an economic crisisefficiency to the nationalised industries. and developing effective policies lO mitigate the curse of xed. over-regulated and over-unemployment.
a brief artificial pause. it wasThe foundations of recovery have deen firmly taid. In the next Parhament. we shall builc on
“urther behind its neighbours.. this progress.
n extremely difficult task. ThetSuccess against inflation.
ce the l93Os have made those: Steadier prices and honest money are essential conditions for recovery. Under the last Labour: government. prices doubled and inflation soared to an all-time peak ~ despite the existence of a
I: battery of controls on prices. profits. dividends and pay.
I th extracts from the manifestos of other{Today. there are no such controls. Yet prices are rising more slowly than at any time since the
I‘l96Os. During the last year. inflation has come down faster in Britain than in any other major
I.289 economy. With lower inflation, businessmen. families. savers and pensioners can now begin atInvoiving employeesI last to plan and budget ahead with confidence. Good employers ee he
In the next Parliament. we shall endeavour to bring inflation lower still. Our ultimate goalThis is vital for efficiens yd should be a society with stable prices. Many emplovers face cy:
We shall maintain firm control of public spending and borrowing. [f Government borrows toocommon purpose with ther much, interest rates rise. and so do mortgage payments. Less spending by Government leavesof emplover employee tele i more room to reduce taxes on families and dusinesses. the success of the firm ior
We shail continue to set out a responsible financial strategy which will gradually reduce thesharing., growth of money in circulation ~ and so go on bringing inflation down. In each of the last twe::
Our opponents are once again proposing the same financial policies that led to such appallingquarter of a million empl:
inflauien and chaos tn the past. When «tare industries ~!
Ladour’s “Nanonal Economic Assessment’ os a stale repeat of the Social Contract which endedchance to tay shares ih tee I so disastrously in the Winter of Discoment Once again. the Labour Party is committed to carry; es. Out trade union leaders’ instructions in exchange for mere expressions of goodwill. Unemployment: coping w
FaDuring the fast four years.
Commonsense in pay bargainingthan at any time since the -
With lower inflation. we have seen a return to commonsense in pay bargaining. Uncertainty andleast efficient and most o2anxiety about rising prices have contributed to the absurdly high pay claims that destroyed soand our output far less. ines I many jobs. As inflaton subsides. people in work can see the prospect of real. properly-earnedcountless customers to Dus improvements in their living standarts - which have gone up by more than 5 per cent on averageand hundreds of thousancs I over the last four vears. So long as sensible government policies are matched by sensible attitudesAt the same time. there I in industry and commerce. these living standards can continue to improve. concentrated on services an: I
CThe fast four years have shown that a bureaucratic machine for controlling wages and prices isthese changes. All too ofte: I
_"quite unnecessary. [t simply stores up trouble and breeds inefficiency. could replace those that hax I
But Government remains inescapably responsible for controlling its own costs. We areThis Government has an committed to fair and reasonable levels of pav for those who work in the public services. Weno fault of their own. are -.
shall therefore continue to seek sensible arrangements for determining pay in the Civil ServiceWe have committed ove:
and the Natuonal Health Service. foflowing the Megaw Report and the resolution of the NHSploved. This is supportez - pay dispute. amounting to over £256m; It is equally our duty to the mation as a whole to prevent any abuse of monopoly power orspecial measures of this Kir exploitation of the sick, the weak and the elderly. So we must continue to resist unreasonableThis vear. some L. iQuc+ I pay claims tn the public sector. programme of its kind in E I
Trade union reformsFor the trst time. the nes
In the return to more sensible pay oargaining. the trade untons have an important part to play. people the support ther rez
They can be powerful instruments for good or harm, to promote progress or hinder change. We will maintain special he.- to create new jobs or to destroy existing ones. All of us have a vital interest in ensuring that thisand for the older unempic+:
power is used democraticaily and responsibly. Removing the barriers to
Both trade union members and the general public have welcomed the l98O and l982 EmplovWe shall go on reducing the I ment Acts. which restrain secondary picketing, encourage secret ballots. curtail abuse of thewhen thes want to. And a2 closed shop. and restore nghts of redress against trade unions responsible for committing unlawfulmore people can work par:
acts. That is why we have ame
But some trade union leaders still abuse their power against the wishes of their members andminimise the legal res::
the interests of society. Our l982 Green Paper. Democracy in Trade Unions. points the way toencourage moves tows give union members control over their own umons. We shall give union members the right to: Release. which makes it az / hold ballots for the election of governing bodies of trade unions: and the Job-Splitting Schex. I decide periodically whether their unions should have party political funds. jobs:
~We shall aiso curb the legal immunity of unions to call strikes without the prior approval of thoseimprove the efficiency
C)concerned through a fair and secret hailot. ensure that Wages Cor
Political levyunrealistic pay rates, or em: I
Consultations on the Green Paper have confirmed that there is widespread disquiet about howTraining the right of individual trade union members not to pay the political levy operates in practice. If we are to make the mos:. through the system of contracting-out, We intend to invite the TUC to discuss the steps whichof rapid change and more +2 I; the trade unions themselves can take to ensure that individual members are freely and effectivelyTraining for work must s2 I able to decide for themselves whether or not to pay the political levy. In the event that the tradewe have provided the mes I unions are not willing to take such steps. the Government will be prepared to introduce measuresTraining Scheme offers ez: to guarantee the free and effective mght of choice.35O. OOO youngsters by the 2. I; be unemployed in his firs: +: I
Essential services; This is valy a part of our
‘The proposal to curb immunity in the absence of pre-strike ballots will reduce the risk of strikestomorrow - on a scale and in essential services. In addition. we shall consult further about the need for industrial relationsindustrial training and the 3:. in specified essential services to be governed by adequate procedure agreements. breach of whichWe are improving the x.; would deprive industrial action of immunity. The nation is entitled to expect that the operationalike; tackling problems wh:: of essential services should not be disrupted. We shall continue to pres
29O, I weI ae ae!
CONSERVATIVE MANIFESTO{ pensioners can now begin atinvolving employees
Good employers involve their employees by consulting them and keeping them fully informed.
wer still. Our ultimate goalThis is vital for efficiency as well as harmony in industry. We shall continue to encourage it.
Many employers have already done much in recent vears to establish a long-needed sense ofI
If Government borrows toocommon purpose with their workforces. We shall resist current attempts to impose rigid systemsi nding by Government leavesof employer/employee relations in Britain. We will continue to encourage workers to identify withFE the success of the firm for which they work. by the promotion of share-ownership and profiti I ich will gradualls reduce thesharing.3 I wn. In each of the Jast two vears. largely as a result of tax changes we have introduced. about aj ies that Jed to such appallingquarter of a million emplovees have acquired shares in the companies that employ them. i
When state industries are offered to the private sector. we have given their emplovees thefi
Social Contract which endedchance to buy shares in them, and many have exercised this right.4
Party is commited to carryUnemployment: coping with change mms of goodwill, During the last four years. unemployment in the industrialised countries has risen more sharply:
than at any time since the l93Os. Britain has been no exception. We have long been one of theI. pC ning. Uncertainty ancleast efficient and most over-manned of industrialised nations. We raised our own pay far morc. i I pay Claims that destroved soand our output far less. than most of our competitors. Inevitably. this pushed prices up and drovei I peet of real. properly-earnedcountless customers to buy from other countries, forcing thousands of emplovers out of businessi re than 5 per cent on averageand hundreds of thousands of workers out of jobs. I matched by sensible attitudesAt the same time. there has been a rapid shift of jobs from the old industries to the new.
mprove. concentrated on services and the new technologies. Tragically. trade unions have often obstructed; ontrofling wages and prices isthese changes. All too often this has delaved and reduced the new and better-paid jobs whichI ev. could replace those that have been lost.
Hing its own costs. We areThis Government has an impressive record in helping the unemploved who. usually through: I tk in the public services. Weno fault of their own. are paving the price of these past errors. I ining pay in the Civil ServiceWe have committed over £2. OOOm. this vear to training and special measures for the unemCy ad the resolution of the NHSploved. This is supported by substantial help from the European Community's Social Fund. I amounting to over £25Om. in l982. As long as unemployment remains high. we shall maintaini abuse of monopoly power orspecial measures of this kind. which bring effective help to mans of those who have no job ntinue to resist unreasonableThis vear. some l. lOO. OOO people are being trained or helped bv the most comprehensiveI programme of its kind in Europety
For the first time. the new Enterprise Allowance Scheme offers many thousands of unemplovedI
_lavpeople the support they need. but previously could not get. while they start their own businesses{ ve an amporianl part lO play. We will maintain special help for the long-term unemployed through the Community Programme.
ie progress or hinder change. and for the older unemploved through early retirement schemes..
tl interest in ensuring that this.:
Removing the barriers to jobs ed the l986 and l982 EmpioyWe shall go on reducing the barriers which discourage employers from recruiting more staff. even: pallots. curtail abuse of thewhen they want to. And we shall help to make the job market more flexible and efficient so thatI nsible for committing unlawfulmore people can work part-time if they wish. and find work more easily.
(? That is why we have amended the Emplovment Protection Act and why we shall continue to:
2 wisres of their members andminimise the legal restrictions which discourage the creation of new jobs:
‘ade Unions. points the way toencourage moves towards greater flexibility in working practices. such as Part-Time Job union members the right to: Release. which makes it financially possibile for people nearing retirement age to go part-time:
ms. and the Job-Splitting Scheme which heips emplovers to split a whole-time job into two part-timeI atiucal funds. yobs: otee; I out the prior approval of thoseimprove the efficiency of the employment services in identifying and filling job vacancies:
ensure that Wages Councils do not reduce job opportunities by forcing workers to charge unrealistic pav rates. or employers to offer them. I aidespread disquiet about howTrainingI tical levy Operates in pracuce. If we are to make the most of the employment opportunities that present themselves in an ageI
“UC to discuss the steps whichof rapid change and more varied patterns of work and occupation. upto-date training l6 essentialti mhers are freely and effcctvelsTraining for work mus? start with better. more relevant education at school. For schvol-leavers. i ovy. In the event that the tradewe have provided the most imaginative and far-reaching scheme in our history. The Youth!
arepared to introduce measuresTraining Scheme offers every l6vear old a year of serious training for work. It should helpI,35O, OOO voungsters by the autumn of this vear. From now on. no one leaving school at l6 need be unemploved in his first year out of school. I
This is only a part of our wider strategy to ensure effective training for the skills and jobs ofI: s will reduce the risk of strikestomorrow - on a scale and of a quality to match the world’s best. At its heart is our reform of; he need for industrial relationsindustrial training and the apprenticeship system._
Te agreements. breach of whichWe are improving the scope and quality of our training for the emploved and unemploved ed to expect that the operationalike; tackling problems which the Labour Party has never had the courage to face. I
We shall continue to provide for. and improve. the special employment and training needs of
Ii]
7I; CONSERVATIVE MANIFESTOI
4the disabled. and to reform our training agencies to meet more effectively the needs of industryremoved mans of I and workers alike. ment Land Tax: I
The nationalised industries. cut business take I
Reform of the nationatised industries ts central to economic recovery. Most people who work infrom 3O2 per cent to these industries work hard and have a sense of public service. Since l979. we have gone to greatmuch reduces: he: lengths to improve the performance of the state sector, to appoint top-class managers and workh areatly reduces a closely with them to tackle each industry's problems. as fallen from 227+ I
But for all this. few people can now believe that state ownership means beter service to theThis dramatic progzes- I: customer. The old illusions have melted away. Nationalisaticn does not improve job satisfaction, which our oppones: s job security or labour relations - almost all the serious strikes in recent years have been in stateThe changes to tn:
industries and services. We have also seen how the burden -f financing the state indusiries hasjust this. We shall -2.. I: Sept Gaes und government borrowing higher than they need Rave been. Further imprevs~2-, 4A sompany afich has to sausty its customers and compete to survive is more likely to betogether with messere: I
_efficient. alert fo immovauon. and genuinely accountabie to the public. That is why we haveWe want to enc: or.; transferred to private ownership. in whole or in part. Cable and Wireless. Associated Britishencouraging indis:2.2.
Ports. British Aerospace. Britoil, British Rail Hotels; Amersham International. and the Nationalmore employee shere -
7Freight Corporation. Many of their shares have been bought by thetr own empiovees andMore smail firms managers. which is the truest public ownership of ail. We have reducea “te -
We shall continue our programme to expose state-owned firms to real compeution. {n telecom-and cut many of the ce I munications, we have licensed a new independent network. Mercury, and have decided to licensehas already hackes < eo!
two mobile telephone networks. We have allowed competion in commerctal postal services. Expansion Scheme 3 oo
Already. standards of service are beginning to improve. Investment ts rising. And better jobinvestment in smal! ccr
4opportunities are being opened upLo, businesses has mor? th.
We shall transfer more state-owned businesses to independent ownership. Our aim is thatTo help the enginze:
mR /British Telecom - where we will sell 5l per cent of the shares to the private sector ~ Rolls-Royce. now extended lsen <; British Airways and substantial parts of British Steel. of British Shipouilders and of Britishbuv new machines I 'Leyland. and as many as possible of Britain's airports shall become private sector companies. WeThanks to these I: also aim to introduce substantial private capital into the National Bus Company. As before. weand smailer busine--2s _ I
_will offer shares to all those who work in them. the world.: ~ I: We shall also transfer to the private sector the remaining state-owned oil business ~ the British: Gas Corporation's offshore oil interests.. Help for the new techr I
¥We have abolished the Gas Corporation's statutory monopoly of the supply of North Sea gasEven during the recess. I
4to industry. Already there has been a vigorous new lease of life for gas exoloration and develop-has More micrococvs 27.
ment in the North Sea, which had ground to a complete halt under Labour. In the fast Parliament. this progress bv sugrst
B. we passed a law to encourage the private generation of electricity. In the next Parliament. weand by increasing gc+er shall seek other means of increasing competition in. and attracting private capital into. the gas£35Om. in l9824. Bars I zand electricity industries. promote in parner I, Merely to replace state monopolies by private ones would be to waste an historic opportunity. information technoiv zs. I aSo we will take steps to ensure that these new firms do not exploit their powerful positions toaccelerate the ‘rans I
Jthe detriment of consumers or their competitors. Those nationalised industries which cannot beespecially by the enccur.: privatised or organised as smaller and more efficient units will be given top-quality managementhelp firms to jazach I and required to work to clear guidelines. build on the success I, Technology Centres for:
ENCOURAGING FREE ENTERPRISEsanction the faunch I:. en.. entertainment, but fer ch
We want to see an economy in which firms. large and small, have every incentive to expand by winning extra business and creating more jobs. This Conservative Government has been bothRegions, enterprise zor giving these incentives and clearing away the obstacles to expansion: the high rates of tax onWe shall continue i. TM individuals and businesses: the difficulties facing the smail firm trying to grow. and the selfof change and ence ers
©emploved man trying to set up on his own: the blockages in the planning svstem: the bottlenecksindustries. We do ac: or ion our roads: the restrictions on our farmers and fishermen: and the resistance to new ideas andmake sure that i> <+< technologies. secure more eiecuse
In the last four years, many British firms have made splendid progress in improving theirCommunity's Regier:. D: I competitiveness and profitability. But there is some way to go vet before this country has regainedcommunities in need. i that self-renewing capacity for growth which once made her a great economic power. and willfurther develop lecal I
‘make her great again. duty free trading zones. 4 I; Only a government which really works to promote free enterprise can provide the rightdiversify regional eco: I: conditions for that dream to come true.
‘Planningi
Lower and simpler taxes{n our crowded countr th I: In the last four years, we have made great strides in reducing and simplifying taxes. We have: the homes and workpiaces I: cut the basic rate of income tax; raised tax allowances above the level we inherited after‘One particular way to: I: allowing for price rises; brought the higher rates of income tax down to European levels: andderelict and unused. so m. I
5made big reductions in the investment income surcharge. which have particularly helped the old: bodies. We have set up Lu: I '292I
---CONSERVATIVE MANIFESTOI
‘tively the needs of industry; removed many of the worst features of Capital Transfer Tax. Capital Gains Tax and DevelopI ment Land Tax: I cut business taxes. in particular the National Insurance Surcharge. Labour's tax on jobs,. Most people who work infrom 3! per cent to I per cent: and improved stock relief for businesses:7 l979, we have gone to greatmuch reduced the taxes on. and increased the incentives for. gifts to charities: i pclass managers and workgreatly reduced tax bureaucracy, Manpower in the Inland Revenue and Customs & ExciseI has fallen from ll3.4OO in April l979 to 98.5OO in April l983. and is set to fall further. I means better service to theThis dramatic progress is all the more striking when compared with the vast increases in taxation
Ot improve jab satisfaction. which our opponents’ policies would inevitably bring.
Mt vears have been in stateThe changes to this year’s Finance Act on which Labour have insisted show that they intend ing the state industries hasjust this. We shall reverse those changes at the earliest opportunity. I en. Further improvements in allowances and lower rates of income tax remain a high priority. I survive is more likely to betogether with measures to reduce the poverty and unemployment traps. I dlic. That is why we haveWe want to encourage wider ownership. This means lowering taxes on capital and savings: i
Vireless. Associated Britishencouraging individuals to invest directly in company shares. and encouraging the creation ofi I wo and the Nationalmore emplovee share schemes. i I tn_own employees andMore small firms: I al competition. In telecomwe have reduced ghe burdens on small arms. especially in employment legislation and planning. i I and have decided to licenseand cut many oft ¢ taxes they pay. particularly Corporation Tax. Our Loan Guarantee Schemei commercial postal serviceshas already backed extra lending of over £3Mim. to about lO. OOO small firms. The new Businessi l is rising. And bener jobExpansion Scheme. a Major extension of the Business Startup Scheme. will encourage outsidei
°. investment in small companies by special tax reliefs. The construction of new premises for small nership. Our aim is thatbusinesses has more than doubled. I rivate sector ~ Rolls-RoveeTo help the engineering industry and the areas most dependent on it. we have introduced and! I shipbuilders and of Britishnow extended a very successful scheme of grants (SEFIS) to smaller firms. which help them toi I
Wate sector companies WeRuy new machinery. I s Company. As before weThanks to these policies and over one hundred other important measures. the climate for newi, am. and smatler businesses in the UK has been transformed and is now as favourable as anywhere in' I.} ed oil business - the Britishthe world. l I
Help for the new technologies he supply of North Sea gasEven during the recession. our new industries and technologies made remarkable progress. Britainfi is exploration and develop-has more micro-computers in relation to its population than ans other country. We have speeded:
vour. In the last Parliament. this progress by supporting research and spreading knowledge of the technologies of tomorrow: t
In the next Parliament. weand by increasing government support for the new technologies from £lOOm. in l9789 to overl wivate Capital into. the gas£35Om. in l9834. But that is only the beginning. We will now:
promote in partnership with industry. the Alvey programme for research into advanced
‘Ste an historic opportunity. information technology: I their powerful positions toaccelerate the transfer of technology from the university laboratory to the market place. I industries which cannot beespecially by the encouragement of science parks:
en 7o*-quality managementhelp firms to launch new products through pilot schemes and public purchasing: I
CSbuild on the successes of our “Microsin-Schools’ scheme and our network of InformationI
°Technology Centres for the young unemployed so that they are equipped with tomorrow's skills; sanction the launch of new cable networks to bring wider choice to consumers, not just forI very incentive to expand byentertainment, but for the whole new world of tele-shopping and tele-banking. I sovernment has been bothRegions, enterprise zones and freeportsI a: the ngh rates of tax onWe shall continue lO maintain an effective regional policy which is essential to ease the processI ing to grow. and the selfof change and encourage new businesses in arcas which have been dependent on decliningI ung system. the bottlenecksindustries. We do not propose sudden changes in regional policy. But we will:
resistance to new ideas andmake sure that these policies are economical and effective in creating genuine jobs: I secure more effective coordination between central and local government and the EuropeanI rogress In improving theirCommunity's Regional Development Fund to ensure that their actions offer the greatest help to re this country has regainedcommunities in need:
economic power. and willfurther develop focui self-help initiatives. the 24 Enterprise Zones and. our latest innovation. i duty free trading zones. which will oe established in certain experimental ‘Freeports’.
rise can provide the rightdiversify regional economies by encouraging the fullest use of our schemes for innovation. I. PlanningI
In our crowded country the planning svstem has to strike a delicate balance. ll must provide for nplifving taxes. We have: the homes and workplaces we need. It must protect the environment in which we live.;
‘he level we inherited afterOne particular way to achieve this is by bringing back into use the thousands of acres lyingI
‘n to European levels; andderelict and unused. so much of which is in the ownership of local authorities or other publicI particularly helped the old: bodies. We have set up Land Registers to identify this land. and we shall now use our powers to
I. i} a aeI
Ibring it into use. The more this land can be used. the less the need to build on Green Belts andto take responsibility the countryside. uals and their families
We will also bring open-cast coalmining within normal proper planning control. and we shallstandards in the state I establish more control over intensive livestock units near residential areas. Conservatives belie
Energyable to help themselvc I: Britain has come from nowhere to be the world’s fitth largest oil producer. The North Sea successenfounded and ‘O me i. story has been a triumph of private enterprise for the nation's benefit. We shall continue toublic services woe the ': ensure that our taxation and licensing policies encourage development in the North Sea. re tax aver wh, ee ¢ I
In the next Parliament. the interests of the whole country require Britain's massive coal; X fee “and ind pays: industry. on which we depend for the overwhelming bulk of our electricity generation. to returnas. ossihi AL epee
© gconomig viabtlityetrorm ance Sinead.
We shail press ahead with the development of safe nuclear power. It is an important way ofjoined to ether to ak. I; securing lower-cost electricity for the future. We shall set up an Energy Efficiency Office to coUnder his Gov sake I ordinate the Government's conservation effort. so as to ensure that the taxpayer gets the besttion of tt is the £ aaa
4value for money. e family; We recognise that some energy users have special needs. This is why we have: Housing: towards at I ensured that standing charges no longer dominate the buls of smatt gas and electricityWe have given every c I qconsuniers:-.~°‘Many Housing Associ: I; increased help for the needy with their fuel bills. leading to many fewer disconnections: andsingle step towards a he I introduced more favourable terms for the energy-intensive industries. fom che State to the ir I
_Better transport for industryaed aur gament roe I
The national motorway and trunk road network will continue to be developed and improved totoday than four eats 2 I
Yi ‘\high-quality standards. This will not only make driving much safer for all. but also speed andThe Labour Party hz I icheapen the transport of goods. We will also seek to make rail freight more competitive. fighting a rearguard ae
Many of our ports have now been returned from state control to independent ownership. Weawav the tenant's right
Iintend that they should provide profitable and efficient services without the taxpayers’ support. ata discount. and woul I: Tourismthe council. I aOur hotels, resorts and tourist attractions are important because they provide hundreds ofIn the next Parliame I
Ethousands of jobs, earn valuable foreign exchange. and provide holidays for millions of our ownhomes. For public sec: i
4people. We shall continue to support the Tourist Boards and tourism projects throughout theextended to inctude the I country. ownership basis. The m I
Farming and fishinghave been tenants for > I
British farming and horticulture have improved dramatically since l979. Exports have leapt tocent. We shall also help I
£2.3OOm. a year. Since l978. our self-sufficiency in food has risen by more than a sixth. from 53hat home-ownership «I per cent to 62 per cent.‘ nea ownership. I
In Europe. our tough negotiating stance has doubled our farmers’ share of the help available_ Britain needs more he under the Common Agricultural Policy. The cost of the CAP to British taxpayers doubled underyears. the blind prejud:
Labour. Under us. it has been falling in real terms. We have reversed the Labour Government'shousing. But our assure. I disastrous policy for the Green Pound which harmed British farmers. At the same time. we havewhew again. and our sk I not neglected the consumers’ interest. Food prices more than doubled under Labour and rosew We che short-term rer faster than other prices. Under the Conservatives, they have risen less than other prices. Lasth € shail extend our T I vear they grew by less than one per cent, the smallest rise for nearly twenty years.‘ emselves and be reimb.
We have given special help to Britain’s hill farmers, and agreed verv worthwhile Communityane in the last aan schemes for beef and sheepmeat. These have all brought great benefits to Wales. Scotland.. t lav all conduct early I
Northern ireland and the uplands of England. We have launched successfully the ‘Food fromlane whe fuller Part ins
Britain’ campaign, which should help us sell far more of our products both at home and in the5 wate! govern them I rest of the Community. ur goal is to make Br I waWe shall help the glasshouse industry to sell more fruit and vegetables. and to make use of theProtecting the pensione best possible arrangements for heating and insulation. Over the last four sears, I; We welcome the fact that. after long negotiations. the National Farmers’ Union and the Countrysingle person and trom £2 I
Landowners’ Association have agreed on the best way to make more farm tenancies availablePensioners can buy mor: I for young people. We shall legislate on these lines at an early opportunity. We intend to makegovernment. We have enc sure that British agriculture and horticulture continue to make the greatest possible contributiondecide by how much to inc I fto our economic success. Out to be wrong. In future I: We have successfully negotiated a Common Fishing Agreement that provides British fishermenIn the next Parliament. I: with the greatest advantages in our waters in the industry's history. For the first time since weterm benefits against rising I: joined the Community. we now have effective conservation measures, and can look forward tothe basis of realistic pensio I, expanding, rather than declining, stocks of fish. During the next Parliament. we shall introducePensioners may earn with. I hsMeasures to restructure the fishing industry and to encourage investment and better marketing. raising the limit and to ab I
‘Labour failed to pay in l I
4RESPONSIBILITY AND THE FAMILY. the law we passed in l979 iFreedom and responsibility go together. The Conservative Party believes in encouraging peopleOver ll.5m peopte - ha
%294 nnCONSERVATIVE MANIFESTO:
to build on Green Belts andto take responsibility for their own decisions. We shalt continue to return more choice to individ-:
uals and their families. That is the way to increase personal freedom. It is also the way to improve:
anning control. and we shallstandards in the state services. I areas. Conservatives believe equally strongly in the duty of Government to help those who are leastI able to help themselves. We have more than carried out our pledges to protect pensioners against, rice rises and to maintain standards in the National Health Service. This rebuts the tc; ducer. The North Sea successunfounded charge that we want to ‘dismantle the Welfare State’. We are determined that eurI enefit. We shall continue topublic services should provide the best possible value both for people they seck to help and forI: nt in the North Sea. the taxpayer who pays the bill.:
quire Britain's massive coalA free and independent society is one in which the ownership of property is spread as widely ctnicity generation. to returnas possible. A business which is partly or wholly owned by its workers will have more pride in;. performance. Already firms like the National Freight Company. where managers and workers tr. It ts an important way ofoi: Fiwi,>joined together to take over the business. are thriving.
ergy Efficiency Office to coUnder this Government. the property-owning democracy is growing fast. And the basic foundathe taxpayer gets the besttion of it is the family home.:
wh we have: Housing: towards a home-owning democracy:
of small gas and electricityWe have given every council and New Town tenant the legal nght to buy his or her own home.:
-°Many Housing Association tenants have been granted the same right. too. This is the biggest:
aC ‘er disconnections: andsingle step towards a home-owning democracy ever taken. It is also the largest transfer of propertyI
<from the State to the individual. No fess than half a million council houses and flats were sald in the last Parliament to the people who live in them. By our encouragement of private housebuilding. and our new range of schemes to help first-time buvers. there are a million more owner-occupiers developed and improved totoday than four vears ago.
for all. but also speed andThe Labour Party has met these proposals with vicious and prolonged resistance and is stillI cht more competitive. fighting a rearguard action against wider home ownership. A Labour government would take independent ownership. Weaway the tenant's right to buy his council house. would prevent councils selling even voluntarily:
rout the taxpayers’ support. at a discount. and would force any former tenant who wanted to sell his house to sell it back to the council. I they provide hundreds ofIn the next Parliament. we will give many thousand more families the chance to buy theirI davs for millions of our ownhomes. For public sector tenants. the present ‘Right to Buy’ scheme will be improved and ism projects throughout theextended to include the right to buy houses on leasehold land and the right to buy on a shared ownership basis. The maximum discount will be increased by one per cent a vear for those wha have been tenants for between twenty and thirty years. taking the maximum discount to 6O per lO°G Exports have leapt tocent. We shail also help first-time buvers whe are not council tenants through our varius jow_ more than a sixth. from 43cost home-ownership schemes: “home-steading’. building for sale. improvement for sale. andI. shared ownership
* share of the help availableBritain needs more homes to rent. too. in the private sector as well as the public sector. For ish taxpayers doubled underyears. the blind prejudice of the Labour Party has cast a political blight on privately rentedI
‘d the Labour Government'shousing. But our assured tenancy scheme has encouraged builders to star: building new homesI
At the same time. we haveto rent again. and our shorthoid scheme is helping the private sector to meet the needs of thoseI sled under Labour and rosewho want short-term rented accommodation.
less than other prices. LastWe shall extend our Tenants’ Charter to enable council tenants to get Necessury Fepairs doneI vty vears. themselves and be reimbursed by their councils. Housing Improvement grants have been increasedI
\ OO ‘orthwhile Communitysubstantially in the last two years and will continue to play an important role.- renefits to Wales. Scotland. We shall conduct early public consultation on proposals which would enable the builing societies; I successfully the ‘Food fromto play a fuller part in supporting the provision of new housing and would bring upto date the cts both at home and in thelaws which govern them..
Our goal is to make Britain the best housed nation in Europe. I bles. and to make use of theProtecting the pensionerI
Over the last four years. the retirement pension has risen from £l9.5O l £32.45 a week for aI mers’ Union and the Countrysingle person and from £3l.2O to £52.55 for a marned couple. Even after allowing tor price rises.: I ore farm tenancies availablepensioners can buy more with their pension today than thes could under the last Labouri I tunity. We intend to make Igovernment. We have ended Labour's unreliable system of reiving on forecasts of price rises toby
‘reatest possible contributiondecide by how much to increase the pension. In five of the last seven Vears, those forecasts turned!
out to be wrong. In future. pensions will be related to actual and nat esumated price increasesi at provides British fishermenIn the next Parliament. we shall continue to protect reurement pensions end other linked longFor the first time since weterm benefits against rising prices. Public sector pensioners will also continue to be protected onI es. and can look forward tothe basis of realistic pension contributions. In this Parliament. we raised to £57 a week the amounti tliament, we shall introducepensioners may earn without losing anv of their pension. It remains our intention to continueI ment and better marketing. raising the limit and to abolish this earnings rule as soon as we can. The Christmas Bonus. which!
Labour failed to pay in l975 and l976. will continue to be paid every vear in accordance withio the law we passed in l979, i I
‘ieves in encouraging peopleOver ll.5m people - half the working population - are now covered by occupational pensionI
-i; CONSERVATIVE MANIFESTOI
I; schemes. We will consider how the pension rights of ‘early leavers’. people who change jobs. Schools: the pursuit I can be better protected and how their members may be given fuller information about theirFor a long time now.;; pension schemes. schools. This Conserv.
Social securityand the l98O Educate:
Supplementary benefits. too. have been raised ahead of prices. To encourage thrift. instead oftora Fe norities * penalising it. the Government has also raised the amount of savings people can keep without;6 oor were oblig I losing any supplementary benefit. At the same time. we have clamped down firmly on fraud andeG. S were Biter abuse of social securitv.:_ te Government © I.; ran an.4to some of the best ine
Expenditure on cash benefits to the disabled is 2l per cent higher than under Labour. even; atier allowing for rising prices. There has been extra help. too. for those who are least able toGiving parents more 5 I afford their fuel bills. We shall continue to < I
We have introduced - and extended - a widows’ bereavement allowance. We have kept theschooling.
war widows’ pension ahead of prices und removed it from tax altogether. We shall defend Chu
Child benefit and one-parent benefit are to be raised in November to their highest-ever levelAnd we shall defend th; in real terms. We have also improved the family income supplement scheme to help low-paidThis country is now working families. for price rises. As a res.
4Our record shows the strength of our commitment. But our ability to help depends on thehow the money is sper: I
Fwealth Which the country produces. In Britain today, over 4Op in every pound of public spendingBut the Government I is already devoted to health and social security. [t is hypocriucal for the Labour Party: to pretendtrained for the world th I that they could raise public spending on benefits by thousands of millions of pounds withoutUntil now, HM Ins
~admitting the vast increases in taxation and national insurance contributions that would be needed. making sure they are ic c )or the increased inflation that would result. We are: not satisfies I
The Nationa! Health Serviceout ‘ie chal avitee te I
We have more than matched our pledge to maintain spending on the National Health Service5O as to reduce truanc’ I and secure proper value for money. Even after allowing for price rises. the nation is spendingWe have given spe. I substantially more on health, and getting better health care. and play groups and AL i
By fast vear. there were 45. OOO more nurses and midwives. and over 6.5OO more doctors andWe shail also enco:: dentists, working for the NHS than in l978. This has helped to make it possible to treat over twomore compiiters. and < I million more patients a vear in ous hospitals. Until last vear’s futile strike. waiting lists forimproved. and Oleve! -; treatment fell sharpiy. We are setting up:
We intend to continue to make sure that all patients receive the best possible satue for theThe success of these Wi.; money that is spent on the Health Service. The treatment of the elderly. the mentally handicappedour best overseas comre
4and the mentally ill will continue to command our particular attention. We shall continue to maker
4extra provision for those parts of the country in the North and the Midlands which have alwaysHigher education ibeen comparatively short of resources. Our universities and pol:
Unlike the last Labour government which actually cut the hospital building programme by oneof the next generation. \ I; third, we have committed £l. lOOm. to our large-scale programme for building new hospitals. number of British Nobe:; There are now l4O new hospitals in that programme being designed or built. We shall continueand make the best prac: I to upgrade existing hospitals and brighten up shabby wards. Britain hag more stud
To release more money for looking after patients, we will reduce the costs of administeringyoung people in higher < the Health Service. We are asking health authorities to make the maximum possible savings bynow entering full-time ¢ putting services like laundry, catering and hospital cleaning out to competitive tender. We areproportion i them come tightening up. too. on management costs, and getting much firmer control of staff numbers. The very large sums o!
Most people who are ill or frait would prefer to stay in or near their own homes, rather thaneffective way. “Within th.
live in a hospital or institution. Helping people to stay in familiar surroundings is the aim of ourengineering courses
Npolicy ‘Care in the Community’. The Government has given extra powers and extra cash to healthWwa authorities to enable them to finance such community care for individual patients on a long-term¢ have set aside 7 basis. new blood into research
Over the next three
Partnership In caretechnology. with new pos
Conservatives reject Labour's contention that the State can and should do everything.
We welcome the growth in private health insurance in recent years. This has both made moreSport and recreationI health care available. and lightened the load on the NHS, particularly for non-urgent operations. The Government has inc:
We shall continue to encourage this valuable supplement to state care. We shall promote closerand Derelict Land Progra I partnership between the State and the private sectors in the exchange of facilities and of ideas inand by offering one pour I the interests of all patients. begun to transform sports
We also welcome the vital contribution made by voluntary organisations in the social services. But there are still plent
We shall continue to give them strong support. The Conservative Government has already madeIn particular, to reinforce many radical changes in law and taxation which have greatly improved the way charities andevery local education aut voluntary bodies are financed. The terms governing gifts under covenants have been muchschool hours and in the hk improved, and the liability to capital taxation has been lightened or swept away. a bigger part.
We shall continue to support our highly successful ‘Opportunities for Volunteering’ scheme. We have kept up the pr:
In the next Parliament, we shall develop other new ways to encourage more private giving. who enjoy and respect the I eeCONSERVATIVE MANIFESTO
“. people who change jobs. Schoois: the pursult of excellence I iller information about theirFor a long time now. parents have been worried about standards and discipline in many of our: I schools. This Conservative Government has responded to that worry with the Parents’ CharterI and the l98O Education Act. For the first time: I encourage thrift. instead oflocal authorities were obliged to take account of parents” choice of school for their children:
igs people can keep withoutschools were obliged to publish prospectuses. giving details of their examination results:
ed down firmly on fraud and. parents were given the right to be represented on school governing bodies:
’the Government offered Assisted Places to enable less-well-off parents to send bright children:
‘er than under Labour. evento some of the best independent schools.-. I
- those who are least able toGiving parents more power is one of the most effective ways of raising educational standards.
We shall continue to seek ways of widening parental choice and influence over their children’s., ekschooling ulowance. We have kept theWe shall defend Church schools and independent schools alike against our opponents’ attacks.:
ef to their highest-ever levelAnd we shall defend the right of parents to spend their own money on educating their children.
-at scheme to help low-paidThis country is naw spending more per child in school than ever before. even after allowing for price rises. As a result. the average number of children per teacher is the lowest ever. Exactly ity to help depends on the‘how the money is spent. and how schools are run. is up to local education authorities.: 'ty pound of public spendingBut the Government cun help improve standards and make sure that children are taught andSI the Labour Party: to pretendtrained for the world thes will grow up into. i nC of pounds withoutUntil now. HM Inspectors’ reports have remained secret. Now we are publishing them and I
‘ution that would be needed. making sure they are followed up. too.
We are not satisfied with the selection or the training of our teachers. Our White Paper setsI out an important programme for improving teacher training colleges.,. We shall switch the emphasis in the Education Welfare Service back to school attendance.\ the National Health ServicesO as to reduce truancy.
tises, the nation is spendingWe have given special help for refresher courses for teachers. research into special schools. l I, and play groups and nursery schools where they are most needed. I wer 6.5OO more doctors andWe shail also encourage schoals to keep proper records of their pupils’ achievements. buyi I "it possible to treat over twomore computers. and carry out external graded tests. The public examination system will bePo stile strike. waiting lists forimproved. and Olevel standards will be maintained. i. We are setting up fourteen pilot projects to bring better technical education to teenagers. j
2 best possible value for theThe success of these will play a vital part in raising technical training in Britain to the level ofl I ly. the mentally handicappedour best overseas competitors. I
4. We shal! continue to makel
Midlands which have alwaysHigher educationvo ay: Our universities and polytechnics. too, must generate new ideas and train the skilled warkforcet I building programme by oneof the next generation, We have unrivalled institutions and unrivailed inventive genius - as thepy for building new hospitals. number of British Nobel prize-winners shows. What matters is to bring the twa close togetheri I i or built. We shall continueand make the besi practical use of both. I I oo, Britain has more students in professional training than Japan. and a greater proportion of3
¢ the costs of administeringyoung people in higher education than France or West Germany. More of our soung people aref iaximum possible Savings bynow entering full-time degree courses than under the last Labour government. And a largeri competitive tender. We areproportion of them complete their courses than in most other countries.:
-ontro} of staff numbers. The vers large sums of public money now going to higher education must be spent in the mostF new r homes. rather thaneffective way. Within that budget. we want to see a shift towards technological. scientific and:
irr_dings is the aim of ourengineering courses.‘ al ahcate ona longtermWe have set aside money for 7O@ new posts for young lecturers over three vears to bringi new blood into researchI I
Over the next three sears. we will provide for more teaching and research on informationl] technology. with new posts for iecturers, and 2.2OO new places for students. I sid do everything. Sport and recreation!
“& byi
‘a on rpent ceerationsThe Government has increased the real level of funding for the Sports Council. The Urban Aid cre. We shail promote closerand Derelict Land Programmes have also contributed to new sporting projects. By these means.
‘e of facilities and of ideas inand by offering one pound of government money for every one pound raised locally. we have begun to transform sports facilities in the inner cities. I cations in the social servicesBut there are still plents of sports facilities which could he opened up to the gener! pubhe wernment has already madeIn pasticuiar. to remlorce our intuatives for better use of schools and playing fields. we shull uree!
-oved the wav charities andevery local education authority to make school and college premises availabie for use outsideI covenants have been muchschoo! hours and in the holidays. In all these initiatives. voluntary bodies will be enabled to play. a bigger part.,: ‘or Volunteering’ scheme. We have kept up the pressure for public access to parks and reservoirs for anglers and all those ge more private giving. who enjoy and respect the countryside.
297.
i. ie. I
Safety, quality and value for money -; Dealing with crimes. ov I
The best way to protect the consumer is to bring price rises down and keep them down. and tofor the police alone. [2 I increase competition. We have achieved both. and so helped the housewife far more than anythe moral standards of bureaucratic system of controls. We have also brought the state industries under the scrutiny ofbetween the police and I the Monopolies and Mergers Commission. and exposed many of them to competition to preventI them from exploiting their customers. immigration: firm and
_ We shall remain vigilant in defence of the quality and safety of the products people buy. ButWe are utterly oppe<ed I we shall also reduce government intervention wherever it is unnecessary or harmtul to the intereststhat there is real egus..: I: af the customer. opposed to unfairness. I
The provisions of our Data Protection Bill will meet public concern that computers pose awWeological motives. I particular threat to privacy. and will enable us to ratify the European Convention on DataTo have good comm:
Protection. l979. immigtation for se I
Supporting family lifefron from the Com wes
It is not for the Government to trv to dictate how men and women should organise their lives. and we will continue. “3
Our approach is to help people and their families fulfil their own aspirations in a rapidly changing:
world, As an employer. this Government is fulfilling its commitment to equal opportunities for‘The supremacy of Par men and women who work in the public services. We have brought forward for public discussionTh British Constituuen:
proposals for improving the tax treatment of married women. whether or not they go out toments. It is because we. work. keep its rules and proce I
C)We are reviewing the family jurisdiction of the courts, including their conciliation role. with aWe have modernised I
“view to improving the administration of family law. We shall also reform the divorce laws to offeron the actions of the Exe I further protection to children, and to secure fairer financial arrangements when a marriage ends. where they are of practi I
Labour want to abolis I: LAW, DEMOCRACY AND THE CITIZENfuture. A strong Secon
The rule of law matters deeply to every one of us. Any concession to the thief. the thug or thegovernment. I terrorist undermines that principle which is the foundation of all our liberties. That is why weI have remained firm in the face of the threats of hijackers and hunger strikers alike. The defeatNorthern Ireland of the occupation of the franian Embassy is only one example of our determination to be patientIn Northern Ireland. > I bur still unyielding. security forces, We Wy, eegive the support essetie I
Backing the crime-tighters.. The people of Northe I; We recognised from the start the immense and continuing public concern about lawlessness. local democracy and poli I; particularly in some of our larger cities. We acted immediately to fulfil our pledges to give theIreland's constitutional + I
§hard-pressed police every possible backing.; people there. and no dev I; The strength of the police force now stands at record levels: 9. OOO extra policemen haveWe believe that a ciese I
4been recruited in England and Wales alone since l979. They are much better paid and equippedGovernment of the Rep; than ever before. We shall be ready to increase police establishments where necessary in the warthreatening in any way t I against crime. I
4Thousands more policemen are back on the beat. where the public wishes to see them. The quailty of governn I
Ainstead of being isolated in panda cars. It takes time for any reform in police training and methodsThis country is fortuna:: to achieve its full effect, but already street crime is being reduced and public confidence improvedintegrity. The Civil Sen I
4in some of the worst inner-city areas. changes we have made I: The proposals embodied in our Police and Criminal Evidence Bill will help the police toGovernment itself. [t is I bring criminals to justice. At the same time. they will reinforce public support for the police byhas been reduced from I
~laying down clear rules for the proper treatment of suspects. We shall also build more courtroomsstandards of strvice to th: I
Oto reduce delays in trying criminal cases. us to improve civil servic
Last vear's Criminal Justice Act has given the courts tougher and more flexible sentencingThe efficiency ‘scrunm powers This Act makes purents more responsible for crimes committed by their children, andnow identified savings 4:
limproves compensation for the victims of crime, done away with no less:
Courts will also continue to impose Community Service Orders which compel offenders toWe are successfully pt make amends by doing useful work for the local community. We shall set up more compulsoryshall press on with this «I attendance centres to which the courts can send young hooligans. The invaluable work of theor improved. I
Probation Service will continue to be supported. Public spenling is now I
There must be enough prison places to cope with sentences imposed by the courts. We shallthe discipline of cash!: m:
complete our major programme of building which will provide another 4,8OO places in ten newunder control:
prisons. And we are recruiting more prison officers to staff them.
We will also respond to the increasing public concern over obscenity and offences againstLocal government: sav!
public decency, which often have finks with serious crime. We propose to introduce specificWe have checked the rele I legislation to deal with the most serious of these problems.-such as the dangerous spread ofdown to the level of l94. I violent and obscene video cassettes. money by putting service
We accept the case for an independent prosecution service, and will consider how it mightbetter value for money ai I best be set up. every possible saving by”
We intend to extend substantially the grounds that disqualify those with criminal recordsThere are, however. a from serving on juries. demands have caused gre.: I eeI.
ICONSERVATIVE MANIFESTOI
Dealing with crimes. civil disobedience, violent demonstrations and pornography are notsI
Vand keep them down. and tofor the police alone. It is teachers and parents - and television producers too - who influence: housewife far more than anythe moral standards of the next generation. There must be close cooperation and understandingI ndustries under the scrutiny ofbetween the police and the community they serve. I hem to competition to prevent~I immigration: firm and falrI
“the products people buy. ButWe are utterly opposed to racial discrimination wherever it occurs. and we are determined to see: I ssary or harmful to the intereststhat there is real equality of opportunity. The Conservative Party is. and always has been, stronglyoo opposed to unfairness. harassment and persecution. whether it be inspired by racial. religious or oncern that computers pose aideological motives.:
uropean Convention on DataTo have good community relations. we have to maintain effective immigration control. Since l979. immigration for settlement has dropped sharply to the lowest level since control of immigraI tion from the Commonwealth began more than twenty years ago. By passing the British Nationaen should organise their lives. lity Act. we have created a secure system of rights and a sound basis for contro! in the future: I es:: and we will continue to pursue policies which are strict but fair.
‘pirauons in a rapidly changing
‘eM to equal opportunities for; The supremacy of Parllament t forward for public discussionTh British Constitution has outlasted mast of the alternatives which have been offered as replaceI heiner or not they go out toments. It is because we stand firm for the supremacy of Parliament that we are determined tc ae; keep its rules and procedures in good repair.. th(_necihation role, with aWe have modernised the Select Committees to improve Parliament's ability to keep a check ifornrthe divorce laws to offeron the actions of the Executive. We shall continue to pursue sensible. carefully considered reforms ements when a marriage ends. where they are of practical value. I
Labour want to abolish the House of Lords. We will ensure that it has a secure and effective; future. A strong Second Chamber is a vital safeguard for democracy and contributes to good:
ato the thief. the thug or thegovernment. I our fiberties. That is why weI wer strikers alike. The defeatNorthern trelandI ur determination to be patientIn Northern Ireland. building upon the courage. commitment and increasing success of our security forces. we will give the highest priority to upholding law and order. We will continue to give the support essential for the Province to overcome its economic difficulties.
¢ concern about lawlessnessThe people of Northern Ireland will continue to be offered a framework for Participation in fulfil oled:: local democracy and political progress through the Assembly. There will be no change in Northern ur pledges to give theIreland's constitutional position in the United Kingdom without the consent of the majority of. eople there. and no devolution of powers without widespread support throughout the communits sch bere rade gen PaveWe believe that a close practical working relationship between the United Kingdom and theI ts where necess ~ th PP “Government of the Republic can contribute to peace and stability in Northern Treland withoutI ss where Necessary l the warthreatening in any way the position of the majority community in the Province. III public wishes to see them. The quality of government n police training and methodsThis country is fortunate to have a Civil Service with high standards of administration andI d public confidence improvedintegrity. The Civil Service has lovally and effectively helped to carry through the far-reaching a. changes we have made to secure greater economy. efficiency and better management inI
¢ Bill will help the police lOGovernment itself. It is a tribute to this spirit of cooperation that the number of civil servants nlic support for the police byhas been reduced from 732. QKi to 649. OOO with the minimum of redundancies and with highez
Ht @ yuild more courtroomsstandards of service to the citizen. This has saved the taxpayer about £5OOm. a vear, and is helpingI
_. us to improve civil service working conditions.:
and more flexible sentencingThe efficiency ‘scrutinies’ launched by Lord Rayner and other money-saving techniques haveot mitted Ov their children. andnow identified savings worth £4(4im. a vear to the taxpaver. We have abolished 5OO Quangos andi I done away with no less than 3.4(4! different types of government forms. on
“s which compel offenders toWe are successfully putting out to tender more services needed by central government. Wei hall set up more compulsoryshall press on with this wherever public money can be saved and standards of service maintaineciy
The inveluadie work of theor improved. I. Public spending is now planned in terms of hard cash instead of socalled constant prices. and:
‘sed by the courts. We shallthe discipline of cash limits on spending has been extended. As a result. public spending is firmlyI I ther 4.8OO places in ten newunder control.- scents and offences agains: Local government: saving ratepayers’ money; I apuse lo introduce specihsWe have checked the reientless growth of local government spending. and manpower is now back. I as the dangerous spread ofdown to the level of l974. The achievement of many Conservative authorities in savings ratepayers: iG money by putting services like refuse collection out to tender has plaved a major part in gettingij d will consider how it mightbetter value for money and significantly reducing the level of rate increases. We shall encourageI I every possible saving by this policy. H I those with criminal recordsThere are, however. a number of grossly extravagant Labour authorities whose exorbitant rate demands have caused great distress both to businesses and domestic ratepayers. We shall legislateI
I: I
Sa ae
I.\ to curb excessive and irresponsible rate increases by high-spending councils. and to provide aTo make life more ay general scheme for limitation of rate increases for all local authorities to be used if necessary. programme, which wid he
In addition. for industry we will require local authorities to consult local representatives of:
industry and commerce before setting their rates. We shall give more businesses the right to payRural policy and anima!
bv instalments. And we shali stop the rating of empty industrial property. Conservatives understand I
The Metropolitan Councils and the Greater London Council have been shown to be a wastefuleconomy and the presers I and unnecessary tier of government. We shall abolish them and return most of their functions toment will be encouraged I the boroughs and districts. Services which need to he administered over a arder area - such aswe have introduced the V I police and fire. and educatien in inner Londen - all Se run by seit feards of horough oryet affecting the coumtrs-.
district representatrves.-We have taken the 'e2c I to protect seals, and we - I
IMPROVING OUR ENVIRONMENTendangered species.
The Conservative Party has a long record of practical and effective action to improve the qualitySince l979, we have > I of life in our cities and countr side and to preserve our heritage. Since l979. no government inanimals. We ‘have introd. I
Western Europe has done more tor the environment - a clumsy word for many of the thingssported of exported. The I that make life worth living. welcomed this agreemen:
% ©,: oh:
Reviving Britain's citiesforeshadow shanges ae I
We have to cure the disastrous mistakes of decades of town-hall Socialism bv striking a betterand industrial research T balance between public and private effort. Our approach to reviving the rundown areas of our: I "great cities is to use limited public money to stimulate much larger investment by private enter-Controlling pollution;
C }prise. The £6Om. we have earmarked for the Urban Development Grant this vear will be matchedWe intend toiremove leac
<by up to four times that sum from private firms investing in new developments. On Mersevside. to achieve this at the ear!
Operation Groundwork has brought together fandowners, local industry and loca! authorities topaints. food and drinkin:
tackle the squalor and dereliction on the edge of towns. The lessons of this and many otherWe will continue our ¢
Merseyside initiatives will now oe applied in other urban areas. halved in the last ten ves:
We have encouraged people to move back into the inner cities. Builders are not being helpeddisposal of hazardous war I to build homes of the type that voung couples in particular can atford. We shall promote theThe worst problems or. I revival of our inner cities. both by new building, and by sales bv local councils of some of theirand sulphur dioxide neec I rundown property to homesteaders who will resture the homes themselves.. The peaceful applicatio:
We shall encourage greater opportunity for all those who live in our inner cities, including ourcountry}, will be benetic:. I ethaic minorities. sure that the safety recor. I
Our smail business schemes. are helping to bring firms back into the city centres, and theSizewell [Inquiry into Britz I
Enterprise Zones we have set up are already bringing new life to some of the hardest-hit placesgo ahead only if both the I in industrial Britain.; We shall continue to give priority to the areas most in need. Our programme for theans and the neriag i I
4reclamation of derelict land will continue. We shall increase our efforts to secure the disposal ofand ior the erformine art under-used public sector land. using the powers available to us in order to require sites to bethe long-delayed wish to ¢ lsold for homes and jobs. way. We are building a nc; Public transportHistoric Buildings will bo:
]We have already taken important steps to improve the standards of public transport. We haveUnder the Conservatives.: lifted restrictions on long-distance coach services. As a result, about one hundred new expressAnd our tax changes have: coach services have been started. fares have been substantially reduced and comfort improved. of government support. l7; We shall further relax bus licensing to permit a wider variety of services. We shall encourage theusing the tax system to em creation of smatler units in place of the monolithic public transport organisations which we have inherited from the Socialist past. and encourage more flexible forms of public transport. CityBRITAIN IN THE WORLD
©buses and underground railways will still need reasonable levels of subsidy. But greater efficiencyFor nearly four decades. t and more private enterprise will help keep costs down. kept our own freedom se.
The GLC has grossly mismanaged London Transport. We shall set up a new London Regionaleffective deterrent to anet:
Transport Authority for the underground, buses and commuter trains in the London area. ThisThe policies which our will provide the opportunity to split the different types of transport into separate operating bodies, security. I put more services out to private tender and offer the passenger better performance. The protection of peace
In the country, we shall ensure better use of school and special buses for local communities. The invasion of Afghanista I
Restrictians on minibuses will be cut. So will the red tape which makes it so difficult for smallof the Sovet Union. [t rem. I firms and voluntary bodies to provide better ways to get around for those without cars, particularlymaintains massive armed fc the very old and the disabled. Soviet nuclear strength cc
We want to see a high-quality. efficient railway service. That does not mean simply providingmachine.
ever-larger subsidies from the taxpayer. Nor, on the other hand, does it mean embarking uponLabour's support for gest a programme of major route closures. There ts. however. scope for substantial cost reductionsof evidence toI suggest that. in British Rail which are needed to justify investment in a modern and efficient railway. Labour would give up B: I; Fewer restrictive practices and much more attention to the customer are also essential. Railbases in Britain which are:
services are now facing vigorous competition from coaches and cars, and they need to respondAlliance, and put our safet with more innovative and more modern work methods. We shall examine ways of decentralisingWe will fully support the
BR and bringing in private enterprise to serve railway customers. will not ramble with our d.3OO
‘I‘l
CONSERVATIVE MANIFESTO ine. cpunclis. ane lO Provide aTo make life more agreeable in our towns and villages. we will push ahead our bypass consult local representatives. ofprogramme. which wiil help to take more lorries away from them. I more businesses the right to payRural policy and animal welfare property.°Conservatives understand the need for a proper balance between the strengthening of the rural ave been shown to be a wastefuleconomy and the preservation of the beauty and habitat of our countryside. Economic developreturn most of their functions toment will be encouraged in areas where this balance can be best maintained. At the same time.
‘ed over a wider area - such aswe have introduced the Wildlife and Countryside Act - the most important piece of legislationI by joint boards of borough oryet affecting the countryside - to safeguard areas of natural beauty and sites of scientific interest.
We have taken the lead in the much acclaimed measures to save the whale from extinction and to protect seals. and we shall cooperate fully in the important international work to protect all:; endangered spccies. I v€ action to improve the qualitySince l979, we have been working to achieve full European agreement on the treatment ofI. Since l979, no government inanimals. We have introduced measures to improve the conditions of farm animals being transy word for many of the thingssported or exported. There is now a European Convention on the Protection of Animals. WeI welcomed this agreement. and immediately introduced a White Paper on Animal Welfare toI foreshadow changes in the law. We now propose to introduce legislation to update the CrueltyI
HT (isn by striking a betterto Animals Act l876 which will ensure more humane treatment of laboratory animals in scientificI wh ihe rundown areas of ourand industrial research. The sale of pet animals in street markets has been banned.
<er investment by private enter-Controlling pollution
Grant this year will be matchedWe intend to remove lead from petrol. and are taking the initiative with our European partners developments. On Mersevside, to achieve this at the earliest possible date. We will press ahead with our plans to reduce lead in ndustry and local authorities topaints. food and drinking water.
iessons of this and many otherWe will continue our policy to reduce river pollution - the length of polluted rivers has been: halved in the last ten vears. and this work will continue. We shall tighten up the controls on theI. Builders are not being helpeddisposal of hazardous waste and continue to support the movement for recycling and reclamation.
afford. We shall promote theThe worst problems of air pollution have been resolved. But in some areas the levels of smoke' jocal councils of same of theirand sulphur dioxide need to be further reduced.
lemselves. -The peaceful application of nuclear energy. if properly controlled (as it always has been in thisi
3 our Inner cities. including ourcountry). will be beneficial to the environment as well as to the economy. We intend to make\; sure that the safety record of the British nuclear industry continues to be second to none. TheI into the city centres. and theSizewell Inquiry into Britain's first Pressurised Water Reactor is well under way. The project willi some of the hardest-hit placesgo ahead only if both the independen: inspector and the Government are satisfied it is safe. I teed. Our programme for theArts and the heritage. I efforts to secure the disposal ofDespite the recession. this Government has strengthened its support for the best of our heritage
In order to require sites to beand for the performing arts. We have created the National Heritage Memorial Fund. which fulfils ‘I the long-delayed wish to commemorate the dead of two world wars in a permanent and tangible way. We are building a new British Library. The new Commission for Ancient Monuments anc.; Historic Buildings will both safeguard our heritage and give more people a chance to enjov it
> of public transport. We haveUnder the Conservatives. Britain's opera. theatre and ballet continue to win world-wide renown.
rout one hundred new expressAnd our tax changes have helped to revive the British film industry. We shall keep up the leve!
edyced and comfort improved. of government support. including a fair share for the regions. We shall also examine ways of aC) We shall encourage theusing the tax system to encourage further growth in private support for the arts and the heritage.
rl Ofganisations which we have arms of public transport. CityBRITAIN IN THE WORLD subsidy. But ercater efficiencyFor nearly four decades. Europe has been at peace. The strength of the Western Alliance has, kept our own freedom secure. The possession of nuclear weapons by both sides has been an sel up anew London Regionaleffective deterrent to another war in Europe. I rains in the London area ThisThe policies which our Labour opponents now propose would put at risk all this hard-won
Into separate Operating badies. security.
l buses for locel communitiesThe protection of peaceiiii akes j: aThe invasion of Afghanistan and the suppression of dissent in Poland remind us of the true nature makes it so difficult for smallof the Sovet Union. It remains a threat to the liberty and security of the West. The Soviet Union those without cars, particuluriymaintains massive armed forces in Europe. und is extending its naval power throughout the world., oo, Soviet nuclear strength continues ti grow. despite the false assurances of their propagande es Not mean simply Providingmachine does it mean embarking uponLabour's support for gestures of one-sided disarmament is reckless and naive. There is no shrecI for substanual cost reductionsof evidence to suggest that the Saviet bloc would follow such an example.
l and efficient railway. Labour would give up Britain's nuclear deterrent and prevent the United States from using its.
‘tomer are also essential. Railbases in Britain which are part of its nuclear shield over Europe. That would shatter the NATO ats. and they need to respondAlliance, and put our safety in the greates: jeopardy. I: xamine ways of decentralisingWe will fully support the negotiations to reduce the deployment of nuclear weapons. But we will not gamble with our defence. I a ae, CONSERVATIVE MANIFESTOI
The Soviet Union now has over one thousand $S2O warheads. two-thirds of which are targetedCommunity. we are also I on Europe. If the Soviet Union does not recognise over the coming months the legitimate anxietiessafeguarding, our most +. I of the West by agreeing to our proposals to eliminate this class of weapons. we will start deployingWhile world trade dev I cruise missiles by the end of this vear. Even after this. the West will remain entirely ready toenjoved a healthy balan.
negotiate for the removal of some or all of the missiles which we deploy, on the basis of auncompetitive. We deli balanced and fair agreement with the Soviet Union. support to British compa I
The Western Alliance can keep the peace only if we can convince any potential aggressor thatimportant contracts in ib he would have to pay an unacceptable price. To do so. NATO must have strong conventionalWe will build on thes< forces backed bv a nuclear deterrent. And we in Britain must maintain our own independentot British tride and ine nuclear centribuuon to British and European defence. At the same time. we shail continue toPresence very effecuseis support all realistic efforts to reach balanced and verifiable agreements ith the Soviet Union onof other ganoas. We sn
‘arms control and disarmament. shape of tariffs or tradir. I
We have substantially increased our defence expenditure in real terms. We have honoured ourfeyidIi
‘promise to give our regular and reserve forces proper pay and conditions and the equipment theyl ur wicer rolean need to do the job.: na troubled world. Bri:
’There could be no greater testimony to the professional dedication and the quality of equipmentBut we are also respec of the British Armed Services than the brilliant recapture of the Falkland Islands in just 74 days. Prpenty throughout ee
We take pride in their achievement.. finn resisted WApTONCS friends throughout the «
‘Civil detenceto uphold the principles: I
Our overriding desire and policy is to go on preserving peace. We shalt continue to: I
@&However. no responsible government can simply assume that we shall never be attacked. Toconstructive part at the C I oplan for civil defence is a humanitarian duty - not only against the possibility of nuclear, butOur generous but care also of conventional attack. and prosperity of the ~
That is why we must take steps to provide the help that could be vital for millions. To proclaimprogramme helps us as a nuclear-free zone. as some Labour councils have. is a delusion, and services. More than
The Conservative Government has accordingly carried out a thorough review of civil defence. in the Commonwealth, brought forward new regulations to require local authorities to provide improved protection. But government aid is I strengthened the UK Warning and Monitoring Organisations. and nearly doubled spending onLabour Party, we believe I civil defence. flow (o poorer countries °
We propose to amend the Civil Defence Act l948 to enable civil defence funds to be used inan invaluable transfer or I
4safeguarding against peacetime emergencies as well as against hostile attacks.:
Britain in EuropeTHE RESOLUTE APPRC
The creation of the European Community has been vital in cementing lasting peace in EuropeThis Government 8 appre and ending centuries of hostility. We came to office determined to make a success of Britishtruth. even when it is pe:
membership of the Community. This we have done. Most decisions worth <:; Our first priority in l979 was to cut our financial contribution to the Community Budget to abureaucracy ts hard gotr fairer level, Labour made a song and dance about renegotiating the terms. but had achievedunemployment throughot nothing. The bill to British taxpayers soared. During these difficult
We have stood up for Britain's interests, and substantially reduced our net contribution to theBritain's defences and her
Community Budget. We have tenaciously sought a permanent alternative to the annual wrangleslaid the foundations for 3 I about refunds. Until we secure a tasting solution, we shall make sure of proper interim safeguardsThe rewards are begins I for this country. Meanwhile, with the help of Conservatives in the European Parliament. we shallcommonsense, those tew. I. continue to try to shift the Community's spending priorities away from agriculture and towardsWe shall never lose > I industrial. regional and other policies which help Britain more. determined tO revive th: I
SWe shail continue both to oppose petty acts of Brussels bureaucracy and to seek the removalCOCEPEISE cae I
©of unnecessary restrictions on the free movement of goods and services between member states. Under Congerwauve a, with proper safeguards to guarantee fair competition. Britain is regarded for ih I
The Labour Party wants Britain co withdraw from the Communny. because tt fears that BritainPa; ake tha:
4cannot compete inside and that it would be easier to build a Socialist siege economy if we€ mean tO make (has
Iwithdrew. The Liberals and the SDP appear to want Britain to stay in but never to upset our
3partners bv speaking up forcefully. The Conservatives reyect both extreme views,
The European Community is the world’s largest trading group. It is by far our most important export market. Withdrawal would be a catastrophe for this country. As many as two million jobs
4would be at risk. We would lose the great export advantages and the attraction to overseas investors which membership now gives us. [t would be a fateful step towards isolation, at whichI only the Soviet Union and her allies would rejoice. I
3A trading nation.:
Our most important contribution to a healthy world economy is to manage our own affairs successfully. We shall also build on our important role in promoting international action to lencourage recovery through the [MF and other international organisations. With the other leading industrial nations, we shall continue with our realistic initiatives to improve currency stability in; the Western world. and assist nations with excessive debts to regain stability. Together with thei
4ll
32I wothirds of which are targetedCommunity, we are also playing a leading part in preserving an open world trading system. whileI months the legitimate anxietiessafeguarding our most vulnerable industries., eapons. we will start deployingWhile world trade declined tast year. our exports and share of world trade increased, and we t will remain entirely ready toenjoved a healthy balance of payments surplus. despite the pessimists who said the pound was we deploy. on the basis of auncompetitive. We believe in reinforcing success. This Government has given wholeheartedI support to British companies tendering for major overseas projects. and helped them secure many!
ve any potential aggressor thatimportant contracts in the face of the toughest competition., must have strong conventionalWe will build on these initiatives to help our exporters. and vigorously promote the interests naintain our awn independentof British trade and industry in international negotiations - where we have already made our me time. we shall continue to! presence very effectively felt. We have no intention of becoming a dumping ground for the goodsI rents with the Soviet Union onof other nations. We shaff continue to challenge other nations’ unfair barriers. whether in the shape of tariffs or trading practices.
terms. We have honoured our ditions and the equipment theyOur wider roleerLo...
’In a troubled world, Britain is increasingly respected because we stand up for our own interests.\. n and the quality of equipmen: Bul we are also respected because we stand up for the cause of freedom and the spread of atkland Islands in just 74 daysprosperity throughout the world. I
C;, We resisted unprovoked aggression in the Falkland Islands. when the loyal support of our afriends throughout the world reminded us of our common herntage of freedom. We will continueI to uphold the principles for which we fought
We shall continue to give our full support to the Commonwealth and to play an active andI ve shall never be attacked. Toconstructive part at the United Nations.
the possibility of nuclear. butOur generous but carefully controlled aid programme ts both an investment in the freedomI. and prosperity of the poorer countries and in a stable and expanding world economy. That vital for millions. To proctaimprogramme helps us as well as those who receive it. since most of it is spent on British goods and services. More than many other nations. we direct our aid to the poorest countries, particularls srough review of civil defence. in the Commonwealth..
provide improved protection. But government aid is only a part of the total help we give the developing world Unlike the d nearly doubled spending onLabour Party, we believe in permitting a free and profitable outflow of British investment. That. flow to poorer countries has now grown far larger than British Government aid. bringing with it vil defence funds to be used inan invaluable transfer of skills and technology.
ule attacks.
THE RESOLUTE APPROACH ming lasting peace in EuropeThis Government's approach is straightforward and resolute. We mean what we sav We face theI to make a success of Britishtruth. even when it is painful And we stich to our purpose. I
Most decisions worth taking are difficult, Cutting a clear path through the jungle of a modern
- the Community Budget to abureaucracy is hard going. The world recession of the past four vears. and the high level afI the terms. but had achievedunemployment throughout the industnal world. have made the going harderl
During these difficult vears. we have protected the sick anc the elderly. We have maintainedI
“ed our net contrihunon to theBritain's defences and her contribution to the Western Alliances And at the same time. we haveI rnative to the annual wrangleslaid the foundations for a dynamic and prosperous future.
“eroper interim safeguardsThe rewards are beginning to appear. If we continue on ou: present course with courage and;
EC ‘an Parliament. we shallcommonsense. those rewards should multiply in the next five vears from agriculture and towardsWe shall never lose sight of the British traditions of fa: rness and tolerance. We are alsoI determined to revive those other British qualities - a genius for invention and a spint of cracy and to seek the removalenterprise.;. oe
“vices between member states. Under Conservative government. confidence is brushing aside pessimism at home. Abroad. I
Britain is regarded for the first time in sears as a country with a great future as well as 2 great "y. because it fears that Briainpast. I
Socialist siege economy if weWe mean te make that future a reality. I stay in but never to upset our extreme views.
itas by far our most pmportam
As mans as two millon sch.
nd the aliracuon to overseasI eP towards isolation. ai whichI
4 tO manage our own affairs noting international action to sations. With the other leadingI improve currency stability ini in stability. Together with the; I;3O3I
IiI