eee
4SA $2O83I
4Il van be dene wher an!
and practical to cast 3!
F«. 5Re accepted.:
IThe New Hope for Britaining eae
Dpanything else. Aloe +:
qdeepiv encemie thar. I
Se lets pura stor >; The Ladeur movemenrSeng. tener is + I. Frreward Ay Michael Foutwe Abi hncaee SPs cls. aricuiariy acter -_Here you can read Labour's pian to do the things crving out to be done im our country today. commun in nbee oh
To get Britain back to work, To rebuild our shattered industries. To get rid of the ever-growinghave to make wae ote dole queues. To protect and enlarge our National Health Service and our other great socialexample - the Nunn I services. To help stop the nuclear arms race. Here you can see what Labour ts determined to do. to the rescue of wee I and how we shall set about It. the catienss ano SF
But at once the objection is raised: Can we afford ic? Where will the money come from? Areaenen. P Bess I we not just making promises which cannot be fulfilled? Of course. we kee: I: You will find the detaded answers here. But let us emphasise a few of them at once. thanks to acrid “ote:
The first short. sharp answer is that what Britain cannot afford is the present policy of acceptingmuch harder wt Eran I mass unemployment. Mass unemployment on the scale Mrs Thatcher and her government haveBut the pro gramme oIi, been prepared to tolerate - worse than we have ever known before and worse than any otherif a Labour gov er armen::
/industrial country has experienced - imposes a crushing burden on the whole community. land - in parti culae whe:
Of course it hits hardest the voune denied work altogether. and their mothers and fathersdesires anc can sere: I thrown out of their jobs with littl chance of getting another. But it also hits the whole country. essential to aationa: ~s< I
Mass unemployment costs the country £l4 billion, £l6 billion, £l7 billion a year. astronomicAbove ai the nea figures never conceived possible before. and they move higher stll every month. Mass unemploy-guide the nation tow ws I: ment is the main reason why most families in Britain, ail but the very rich. are paying more indetence policy for ours taxes today than they did four years ago when the Conservatives promised to cut them forhave already disigures - I evervbody. Mass unemployment is the main reason why we are wasting our precious North Seaaway our defences ay oil riches. Since l979 Mrs Thatcher's government has had the benefit of £2O billion in tax revenuesthat one 3f the last ~ I from the North Sea. [t has all been swallowed by the huge. mounting cost of mass unemployment. Commons ahen these vi. I; And the of won't fast for ever. although. according to Mrs Thatcher's economics, the unempioy-What we do prorese” ment will.. tecuion to our corte
Our country, no civilised country. can afford the human waste. the industrial and economicevent dangerous ‘ress waste. involved in these policies. We in the Labour Party reject them absolutely, and we describeOne of the most wretct in this Manifesto the real constructive alternative. und how we shall pay for it. thev have devoted to -he
4See, first. our Emergency Programme of Action to be started immediately we are given thesignificance in this Seid; power. Most of these measures are designed to start the drive for expansion, and the cost ofcontrolled Cruise m - le I them has been added up. How fast can the country escape for the present stagnant rut? That isa the real question.:7reference to the oan I
Just a week before Sir Geoffrey Howe. the Tory Chancellor, produced his last Budget to keeppresented bv Botch Cy us in the rut, Peter Shore. Labour's Shadow Chancellor. produced his budget for expansion. Thethemselves with the came costs he set out - an £ll billion expansion -- would cover, as they were designed to cover, theuniverse..
items we have listed in the Emergency Programme. the promises we have tabulated. So little isThe first task of a new it true that Labour has not counted the cost. No party in opposition has ever stated its intentionsthese supreme questices
‘so clearly and comprehensively. in association with othe:
aThen what happens? What happens after the first expansion is launched? Here in these pagesthe scale of the challenze we describe the conditions for success. the pace we can move forward. how that will depend on‘we are not alone in eur 2 the response we can secure from all sections of the community. on the partnership we haveDoth sides of the Atlantic.
established with the trade unions. Without that continuing partnership to rebuild our country. allfor a nuclear freeze. for: I else will fail. True enough: but Labour is the only party which has worked for this partnershipwhole monstrous nuctear and pledges it for the future.: I
And where will the money come from? Some of it will come from those vil revenues nowIn thi; pouring down the drain. Some of it will come from the billions we waste on the dole queues. he this campaign docume:
Some of it will come from the billions now being allowed to be exported in investment abroad. ow a Labour governmen:
Yes, and some of it will be borrowed. Mrs Thatcher's dirty word. Of action, for a full. fives: I
But borrowing in that sense is what every intelligent government since the war in Britain hasThe years of Tory failure I done - including even Conservative governments. Borrowing in that sense is what has been doneWhen the Tories took off I by other governments in this world slump who have kept their unemployment much lower thanLiving standards had gone ours - and their inflation rates low too. economic growth, high lev I
Of course the slump can be beaten. if we have the will and the right policies. The Europeanby the Tories. Nearly thre:
-governments which have survived it best have been mostly socialist governments rejecting Thatch-the official count. Plant a:
gncc ne eemnamneniememmmmmniineitmnnsncnnnncm ccm ansssssii iSi}
LABOUR MANIFESTO ierite nostrums. And the whole wider experience of the Western world since l945 proves whatI ican be done when governments set before them full employment as a target. Is it truly realistic,. and practical to cast all that knowledge aside? It is just not true that mass unemployment musti. sy‘he accepted.,
B rital nRather. if nothing can be done about unemployment. nothing truly enduring can be done about ianything else. Allow it to persist and it will corrode the rest of aur society. It will make moreI deeply endemic than ever the injustices. the bitter hardships, which afflict so many of our people.: So let's put a stop to defeatism. and put a stop too to all those sermons about Victorian values. i
The Labour movement - the Labour Party and the trade unions acting together - came into heing. as one of our poets. Idris Davies. said. to end “the long Victorian night”. It was a fight: to intraduce civilised standards into the world of ruthless. devil-take-the-hindmost individualism..: Particularly after our l945 victory, when Labour had a majority. we set to work creating a realI be done in our country today. icommunity in which the strong would come to the aid of the weak. in which the profit test would es. To get rid of the ever-growinghave to make way for the human test. It was the Labour Party which created - to take just oneI mice and our other great social: example - the National Health Service. in the teeth of bitter Tory opposition. Labour will come:
vhat Labour is determined to do, to the rescue of that service and make it worthy of those who founded it. those who serve it. and. the patients who need it most of all. It ts a commonsense example of democratic socialism in wilt the money come from” Areaction./
Of course. we know that the full work of rebuilding wil! not be easy. Of course we know that,
3 Ov them at ance.; thanks to world conditions and the Conservative vears of destruction and decay. our task is made:
ispresent policy of acceptingmuch harder.
aicher and her government haveBut the programme of socialist reconstruction outlined in these pages. can be carried through refore and worse than any otherif a Labour government commands the support of the other great democratic institutions in theI l On the whole community. tand - in particular the local authorities and the trade unions. Labour is the only party which. and their mothers and fathersdesires and can secure the working partnership between the government and the trade unions' ut it also hits the whole country. essential to national recovery.
l. £l7 billion a year. astronomicAbove all. the new Labour government will play a much more ambitious part in helping to every month. Mass unemploy-guide the nation towards peace. and. as an essential part of the process. in establishing a sensibleI re very rich, are paying more indefence policy for our country. One bunch of smears and scares with which Tors propagandists lives promised to cut them forhave already disfigured this election campaign suggests that the Labour Party proposes to throwI wasting our precious North Seaaway our defences. lO abandon our alliances. Ht ts just not true. And it should not be forgottenI efit of £2O billion in tax revenuesthat one of the last acts of Mrs Thatcher's government was to stop the debate in the House of ting cost of mass unemployment. Commons when these slanders could have been nailed.\ cher’s economics. the unemploy-What we do propose to do is to get rid of the nuclear boomerangs which offer no genuineI;:; Protection to our people but. first and foremost. to help stop the nuclear arms race which is the te. the industrial and economicmost dangerous threat to us all.; hem absolutely. and we describeOne of the most wretched features of the present government's record has been the low interest hall pay for w. they have devoted to the work of securing international disarmament. No British imtiative of any d immediately we are given thesignificance in this field has been taken. Instead. the programme for establishing American-:
for expansion. anc the cost ofcontrolied Cruise missiles on our soil has been accepted without question. and the Trident he present stagnant rut? That isprogramme for the expansion of the British-controlled nuclear force has been accepted withoutI; reference to the possibilities of disarmament. Indeed. the logic of the case of the nuclear deterrent. I roduced his lasi Budget to keeppresented by British Conservative Ministers. is that all peace-loving countries should equip d his budget for expansion. Thethemselves with the same protection. It is a logic which would intensify the race and destroy the hev~ere designed to cover. theuniverse., IsC ve tabulated. So little isThe first task of a new Labour government will be to restore a sense of sanity in dealing withI: on has ever stated its intentionsthese supreme questions. We offer a combined programme of action by this country and of action in association with other countries. We are the only party that offers such a programme to meet launched? Here in these pagesthe scale of the challenge. We are the oniy party that offers a non-nuclear defence policy. But tward. how that will depend onwe are nol alone in our plans and our aspirations. Multitudes of people in manv other lands. on x. an the partnership we haveboth sides of the Atlantic. in Asia and Africa and Europe too. are reads to join us in the campaignI rship to rebuild our country. allfor a nuclear freeze. for fresh exertions to stop the proliferation of these weapons. to stop the:
nas worked for this partnershipwhole monstrous nuclear race to destruction.
¢ from those oil revenues nowIn this campaign document we set out Labour's alternative to mass unemployment. We explain we waste on the dole quenes. how a Labour government will help to stop the nuclear arms race. We provide a radicai programme exported in investment abroadof action. for @ full. five-vear parliament. te save British industry and rebuild the welfare state.- ni since the war in Britain hasThe years of Tory faliure hat sense is what has been doneWhen the Tories took office in May l979. unemployment was falling and the economy growing. l nemployment much lower thanLiving standards had gone up by a sixth in two years. and North Sea oil held out the prospect of economic growth, high levels of employment and better social services. All this was thrown awayi e nght policies. The Europeanby the Tories. Nearly three and a quarter million men and women are now out of work, even on:
- governments rejecting Thatch-the official count. Plant after plant forced to close. Manufacturing production down by a fifth.
III een\:.!
SongLABOUR MANIFESTOI ifInvestment cut by a third. Our domestic markets captured by imports of manufactured goods. Improve chil I; After four years of Mrs Thatcher. Britain is a poorer country. We have fared far worse thanTake wees to I; any other major industrial country. The unprecedented advantage of North Sea oil and gas -Reverse 6 ° I: worth. in tax revenues alone. 3p in the pound on income tax - has been squandered. withInere: < he i; nothing whatsoever to show for it. fase ine I
What have all these sacrifices achieved? Our economy today is weaker. not stronger. than inEncourage and as!4l979. There is no prospect of real economic growth. Indeed. the Tories no longer dare to predicttemprosement.: Arc: when unemplovment will begin to fall. True enough. inflation. after being forced to record fevelsPrionty sill ge 2O
Iby the Tories. has been brought down. But look at the cost in jobs. in poorer housing. in livingtor the first fuil se; standards. and in lust opportunities for our south. And now inflation is set to increase again. Besn a ate with interest rates and mortgate rates key to re taothe Tom PWR on I
The legacy af four Tory sears goes cenind anemploement and industria: dechine: Pevond thecoal neusiey ons I: yJaMage Gone to our social services: Sesend oven te dangerous commitment to new nuciearune hire ae weapons. ft is expressed in the deep sense of outerness, distrust and despair now felt among soelectrificauer. snd
5many sections of the community. Our task will be to heal these wounds and rekindle among theSETVICES.
British people a aew sense of unity and common purpose.7Act to improv: I
An urgent started I fbuildings. i qEMERGENCY PROGRAMME OF ACTION{Introduce 3
Within days of taking office. Labour will begin io implement an emergency programme of action, citizenship and mr to bring about a complete change of direction for Britain. Our priority will be to create jobs andAsian Britons.: give a new urgency to the struggle for peace, In many cases we will be able to act immediately. Give a new pric; In others. which invotve legislation. they will take longer to bring into effect. But in all cases weties greater freedom shall act swiftly and with determination. This is what we plan to do. We will: the legislative powe: I ig \Launch a massive programme for expansion. We will: In international I
Provide a major increase in public investment. including transport. housing and energywill:. I conservation. Cancel the I
3Begin a huge programme of construction. so that we can start to build our wav out of thefor the ren I
{slump. lifetime of I
Halt the destruction of our social services and begin to rebuild them. by providing a substantialBan arms > I
-increase in resources, Increase ai iIncrease investment in industry. especially in new technology - with public enterprise takingRe-estanint I; the lead. And we will steer new industry and jobs to the regions and the inner cities. Take acten I
Ensure that the pound is competitive: and Avid back prices through action on VAT. rents. We will also oper I: rates and fares. legislation. to prepar I
‘introduce a cash programme of employment and training. with new job subsidies andlifetime of the Labou I: allowances. aoeA five-year program I: Begin to rebuild British industry, working within a new framework for planning and industrialLabour's emergency; I democracy. We will: own it will not be ene I
Agree a new national economic assessment. setting out the prospects for growth in theThe programme we economy. office. Clearly, we car >
Prepare a five-year national plan. in consultation with unions and employers. by the Tories. and Br
Back up these steps with a new National Investment Bank. new industrial powers. and aworld recession could: new Department for Economic and [adustrial Planning. Moreover. our prop:
Repeal Tory legislation on industrial relations and make provision for introducing industrialis thus heavily depeni I democracy. sustained increase inI
Begin the return to public ownership of those public industries sold off by the Tories. of work. [t is this that: Start to create a fairer Britain, with decent social services for all. We will: and cut the enormous
Yase hte benefits by £2 a week. and give special heip to one-parent families and familiesin over a number of ye. i aywith disabled dependants.
}Uprate the pension ia November l983 by the full amount needed to protect against inflation: Ending peat meme and increase pensions by £l.45 a week for a single person and £2.25 for a married couple. of this vernment. Th I
4Provide more resources for the health service with an increase of at least 3 per cent a veartnt O eramen en in real terms. taking spending power:
qImprove the personal social services. such as meals on wheels and home heips. with analike, ney have forced!
increase of at least 4 per cent a year in real terms. ee approach is diffe
Spend more on education, including on essential books and equipment, and the assistedin crease is spending. Sp-:
place scheme: and stop selection in secondary schools.‘obs. not aie inc ee
Begin to develop comprehensive care for the under-fives. Oe ter and better trains. I
Begin to develop a strategy to eliminate low pay. for the eledertv and for I
Introduce positive action programmes to promote women's rights and opportunities, and appointthe factories. More spe:
a cabinet minister to promote equality between the sexes. We will: provide the new wealth (I
Strengthen the Equal Pay Act and the Sex Discrimination Act. to invest. and more reso I neLABOUR MANIFESTO parts of manufactured goods. Improve child care and other sacial services.
We have fared far worse thanTake steps to end discrimination in education and training ze of North Sea oil and gas -Reverse Tory cuts in maternity rights.
- has been squandered. with - -Increase the maternity grant.. weaker. not stronger. than inEncourage and assist local authorities to begin a massive programme of house-building and ree: improvement, through an immediate SO per cent increase in their housing investment programmes.!
“aries no longer dare to predict: Priority will go to the urgent repair and replacement of run-down estates. We will freeze all:
zr being forced to record levelsFonty WHE ge To the UrePpplaceestates. Nye€ all rents:
hs, in poorer housing. in livingfor the first full year.;‘ lation is set to increase again. Begin a major programme to stop the waste of energy. We will stop Sizewell and abandon:. the Tory PWR programme. and open urgent discussions. with the unions and management in the industrial decline: bevond thecoal industry. on a new Plan for Coal. a.. commitment to new nuclearGive more help to public transport. with funds to increase investment - especially in rail:: electrification and better freight facilities. Councils will be given new powers to support local ind despair now felt among soservices
»unds and rekindle among theAct to improve the environment and deal with pollution - including a ban on lead in petrol.
An urgent start will be made on improving our inner cities. including action on derelict land and buildings.‘
Introduce @ posiuve action programme for the etic minorities, We will alse introduce lergency programme of action. citizenship and immigration laws which do not discriminate against either women or biack and whill be ta create jobs andAsian Britons.
iit hele to act immediately. Give a new priority to open government at local and national levels. and give local communiinto effect. But in all cases weues greater freedom to manage their own affairs. We will also introduce an early Bill to abolish o. We will: the legislative powers of the House of Lords.
In international policy. we shall take new initiatives to promote peace and development We.;. will:: ransport. housing and energyCancel the Trident programme. refuse to deplov Cruise missiles and begin discussions, tt to build our wav out of thefor the removal of nuclear bases from Britain. which is ta be completed within the:°lifetime of the Labour government.
lem. by prow iding a substantialBan arms sales la repressive regimes.;.
Increase aid to developing countries towards the UN target of O.7 per cent.
~ with public enterprise takingRe-establish a separate Ministry of Overseas Development.
nd the inner cities. Take action to protect the status of refugees in Britain.
wough action on VAT. rents. We will also open immediate negotiations with our EEC partners. and introduce the necessary
°legislation. te prepare for Britain's withdrawal from the EEC, wo be completed well within the with new iob subsidies andlifetume of the Labour gavernment
A five-year programme
“& for planning and industrialLabour's emergency programme of action will get Britain on the road to recovers. But on its own it will not be enough to establish a fairer. more prosperous. more caring Bnitain
Prospects for growth in theThe programme we set out in the pages which follow is. therefore. for a full. five-vear term of office. Clearly. we cannot do evervthing at once. The economy has been dangeroush weakened ind emplovers. by the Tories. and Britain is considerably poorer than when we were last in government. The new industrial powers. and aworld recession could hamper our plans for economic revival.
Moreover. our proposals add up to a considerable increase in public spending. Our programme yiopfor introducing industrialis thus heavily dependent upon the achievement of our basic objectives: namely. a large and
Csustained increase in the nation’s output and income on a matching decline in the numbers out
» sold off by the Tories. of work. It is this that will make the resources available for higher public spending programmes
Le will: and cut the enormous cost of unemployment. Even so. some of our commitments will be phased eparent families and familiesin over a number of vears. At each stage. clearly. we shall have to choose carefully our priorities.
id to protec: against inflation: Ending mass unemployment;.;..
< ter a marned couple. The present hideous level of unemployment ig nolan accident. It is the direct result of the policies of at least 3 per cent a yearof this government. The Tories have cut public investment and services. and increased taxes.. taking spending power out of the economy and destroving yobs in both public and private sectors is and home heips. with analike. They have forced up interes: rales and kept the paund too high - a combination that has crippled British industry. and helped lose us markets at home and abroad cuuiyment. and the assistedOur approack is different We will expand the econam: Bs prov iding a strong anc measures increase in spending Spending money creates joms Money spent on raifwav electrincanion means jobs. not only in consiruction. but aiso in the industries that supply the equipment - as well as faster and better trains. If we increase pensions and child benefits. it means more spending power.. for the elederly and for parents. more bought in shops. more orders for goods. and more jobs in
I 3d opportunities. and appointthe factories. More spending means that the economy will begin to expand: and growth will provide the new wealth for higher wages and better living standards. the right climate for industry to invest. and more resources for the public services.
IVu. LABOUR MANIFESTO
FOur central aim will be to reduce unemployment to below a million within five years of takingequality. The prodlem office. We recognise the enormous scale of this task. When we set this as our target. unemploymentat present is detined as:‘was 2.8 million. according to the official figures. On this basis. it is now at feast 3.2 million. Ourfull-time low-paid aor target will chus be all the more difficult to achieve. [t remains, however. the central objective ofthese figures voune we
7our economic policy. of almost 6 millicn -
To achieve it we will need five years of economic growth. with a Labour government carryingWe will work rogeth through all of the industrial. financial and economic policies outlined here. But we will also workand arbitration. We «
F‘sith other governments - especially socialist governments - to bring ahout a coordimatedtaimness and prere- co
EXPANSION Of our econemes. estitish these cotge
EEconomic expansion wii make it possitle fo end the waste of mass unemples ment. But it willSAtutOrs MIU we alsa reduce the human costs of unemployment - the poverty. the broken homes. the increase in tilness and suicides. And it will provide the resources we need to increase social spending. asindustrial democracy we must, at least in line with the growth of the economy. Industrial democracy i must have clear and
How will we pay for it? economic planning.
Given our commitment to increase public spending, it ts mght that people should usk: how wll- on information. coi we pay for it? in our joint statement. It Would be wrong to finance the initial boost to spending by increasing taxation. Only if ourswork out with the unt was a fully emploved economy would this be the right way of doing it. But our economy todayWe will repeal the is chronically under-employed. We have people out of work. idle plant. and unused savings. Tocollective bargaining. "finance expansion by increasing taxation in these circumstances would be wrong. For the increasedworkers, part-time we
\spending in one part of the economy would be cancelled out by decreased expenditure elsewhere. The Tories’ cuz-bac
Of course. once the economy gets much nearer to full employment. some taxes will have to beLabour will activeiv si
Iincreased. both to shift the tax balance towards those who can best afford to pay. and to helpplace..
Ifinance our social programme.
Like any other expanding industrial enterprise. we shall borrow to finance our programme ot: investment. This is better than borrowing. as the Tories are doing. in order to pay for the dole gqueue of to provide finance for the Argentine government to buy arms. SAFEGUARDS FOR
4There is no shortage of savings in the country available tor borrowing today. Indeed. vastIncreased spending «l
-amounts of British money - more than the government's total borrowing requirement last vearcreate jobs if it is soa
- are flowing into overseas investment. For with our present slump. there ts not the demand foran excuse (O pul D f investment here. invesiMent is Mace fo
But the scale of borrowing will not be nearly as great as the increase in spending. SpendingFirst, we will see Ul fgenerates new income and new savings. As the economy recovers we shall be able to spend lesssure that public Dorr:
on keeping people unemployed. And when people get jobs they will also pay income tax andwithout disruptive or spend more on goods which are taxed. Last vear benefit payments. and tax revenues foregone_ Second, exchange ¢
4- because of unemployment - cost the nation some £l7, OOO million. There are also importantfoolishly scrappec Dy savings to be made by cancelling the present government's massive expenditure programmes oncurrency speculation
Trident and on PWR nuclear reactors. capital tesources hat
Third, we must ens
This means maintaini
4WORKING TOGETHERhave kept interest re: At the heart of our programme is Labour's new partnership with the trade unions. Our policiesoverpriced pound: ax., have been worked out with them. The Tories take pride in rejecting any chance of constructiveSea oil, has been sen
‘cooperation with the trade unions. But it is the nation that has paid the price - the economyexports abroad and r iin ruins. and industrial relations a battlefield. We believe that there is a better way: to harnessA policy for imports
Bhthe goodwill and cooperation of working people and to work together to create a better life forB porcy: po all. But we must also plat
-Our starting point in government will be to discuss and agree with the trade unions a nationalin halance. We mast jeconomic assessment, as deseribed in our joint statement with the TUC, Partners in Rebuildinge muses tha: on
Britain. This will set out the likely growth in the national output and how it could be shared. Itgrowin imports sn will cover the allocation of resources. and the distribution of income between profits, earnings. ha from employment, rents, social benefits and other incomes. [l will also take into account ourUse agreed dev policies on the redistribution of income and wealth, not least through the reform of taxation. Itdominate our econen will take a view on what changes in costs and prices would be compatible with our economic andwill be to prevent exc. social objectives, and help to ensure that our plan for expansion is not undermined by inflation. Use public purch
We will not, however, return to the old policies of government-imposed wage restraint. The_ Introduce back-« assessment will thus play a crucial part in our national plan. achieve our objective qThe assessment will also play an important role in Labour's plans for the redistribution ofOur purpose in trade wealth and power in our society. For, as we emphasise in Labour's Programme, our aim is nothingimports, paid for by ¢ less than to bring about ‘a fundamental and irreversible shift in the balance of power and wealthof deflation, which re
Iin favour of working people and their families’. will also encourage l
Within the framew:: an Offensive against low pay; to imports from deve fe¢ next Labour government will launch an offensive against low pay as part of our strategy forwill create acute prot tion within five years of takingequality. The problem of low pay remains acute bath in relative and absolute terms. ee pay, is as Our Large, unemploymentat present is defined as less than two-thirds of average male manual earnings. there were 3 million
> now at least 3.2 million. Ourfull-time low-paid workers in l982. of whom over 2 million were women workers. Adding to vever, the central objective ofthese figures young workers, part-time workers and homewarkers produces a total in the region of almast 6 million - a great majority of whom are women._: Labour government carryingWe will work together with the unions to tackle low pay and extend the concept of fair wages
‘d here. But we will also workand arbitration. We will strengthen the Equal Pay Act. We strongly emphasise the principles of
» bring about a coordinatedfairness and proper comparability. and will ensure machinery is available for the trade unions to establish these principles. We will also discuss with the TUC the possibility of introducing a ass unemployment. But it willstatutory minimum wage.
pos broken homes. the increaseIndustrial democracy.
I Oancrease social spending. asIndustrial democracy is vital to the success of the national plan. We believe that working people must have clear and definite rights to a say in running their firms - and to an influence in economic planning. We will give new statutory Tights to workers - through their trade unions peaple should ask: how will- on information. consultation and representation within their companies. These are described in Our joint statement with the TUC, Economic Planning and industrial Democracy. But we will reasing taxation. Only if ourswork out with the unions concerned what this means for the individual industries and firms; vg H. But our economy todayWe will repeal the divisive Tory ‘employment’ laws and provice new statutory support for on Re unused savings. Tocollective bargaining. We will also give proper employment protection to women and to homedtong. For the increasedworkers, part-time workers and temporary workers,
‘eased expenditure elsewhere. The Tories’ cut-backs in the work of the Health and Safety Commission will be reversed.
l, some taxes will have to beLabour will actively support the commission and the role of joint safety committees in the work st afford to pay. and to helpplace.
to finance our programme of sim Order to pay for the doleSAFEGUARDS FOR EXPANSIONI-- orrowing today. Indeed. vastIncreased spending will not be enough to ensure sustained economic growth. Spending will not crowing requirement last yearcreate jobs if it is soaked up by imports. We must not allow firms to use a return to growth as a, there is not the demand foran excuse {O pul up prices. It will. in addition. be essential to coordinate expansion so proper investment is made for the future.
crease in spending. SpendingFirst, we will see that our financial and monetary policies support expansion. We will make we shall be able to spend lesssure that public borrowing is financed. through the financial institutions and national savings.
will also pay income tax andwithout disruptive or damaging changes in interest rates,
‘. and tax revenues foregoneSecond. exchange controls - maintained by successive British governments since l939: and so. m. There are also importantfoolishiy scrapped by the Tories in l974 - will be reintroducez. This will help to counter
< expenditure programmes oncurrency speculation and to make available - to industry and government in Britain -~ the large capital resources that are now flowing overseas.
Third. we must ensure that our trade and balance of payments contribute to our expansion.
This means maintaining the pound at a reahstic and competitive rate. Tory monetary policies have kept interest rates far too high. pushing the pound bevond its competitive value An he trade unions. Our policiesoverpriced pound taxes exports and subsidises imports. Our baiance of trade. other than North ng anv chance of constructiveSea oif, has been seriously damaged as a result. A competitive exchange rate will assist British oC price - the economyexports abroad and make British goods more competitive at home.
reJbetter way: to harness ther to create a better life forA policy for imports.
But we must also plan ahead so that. as the economy expands. we keep our exports and imports
I th the trade unions a nationalin balance. We must therefore be ready to act on imports directly: first, in order to safeguard
I TUC. Partners in Rebuildingkey indusiries that have heen seriously put at risk bs Tors policy: and second. so as to chech the
I ad how it could be shared. higrowth of imports should they threaten to outstrip our exports ana thus our plan for expansion.
me hetween profits. earningsWe will: a.. os
K alsa take into account ourUse agreed development plans. which we shall negotiate with the large companies that ugh the reform of taxation. [ldominate our economs. so as to influence their purchasing and Gevelopment policies Our aim ratibie with our economic andwill be to prevent excessive import penetration and promote our own exports.
not undermined by inflation. Use public purchasing policy to help support our Strategy.
Impoxed wape restraint. TheIntroduce backup import controls. using tariffs and quotas. if these prove necessary. to. achieve our acjective of trade balance - upon which sustained expansion depends.
‘am tor the redistribution ofOur purpose im trade policy is not to reauce trade but to make Possidie an orderis cxapanson of
‘rogrumme., our aim is nothingImports. paid for by our growing export trade. We will thus be abie to replace the present policies balance of power and wealthof deflation. which restrict world trade. by policies of expansion. which increase world trade. We will also encourage international action for expansion and increased world wade.
Within the framework of an orderly expansion of trade. we will also seek to give real preferences to imports from developing countries. particularly from the poorest countries, except where this
Day as part of our strategy forwill create acute problems for particular industries in this country..
aiaf
4LABOUR MANIFESTO
Prices - controlling inflationprice controls. financ
4The Tories have used mass unemployment to control inflation. We completely reject thiscompanies. to purchs yapproach, We believe at is madness to keep people out of work deliberately. Our priority aii be. Monitor closely: to expand the economy and create jobs. But we are also determined to prevent scouring pricesUnit. A UKbased jExpansion will in itself help cut the costs of production and therefore hold back prices. But weDevelop regiona:
will use other measures to help restrain inflation. We will: authorities. Regrenai
Lise direct measures of price restraint, such as cutung VAT. and subsidies on phasic products. ment to a Northern to cut into inflation as and when necessary.: agenctes will have oo
Stop using public sector charges, such as gas prices - up Ov ilo percent since IMTU - is astasider seine Tes ce,; faca-docr Way of raising taxes. as tne Temes have donedivengthea the N
4Buy our joad where ites cheaper. on world markets. following Britain's a ctherawai from theDevelcpment Boars: FEC::. adequate resources fo:
‘Gue powers io a new Price Commission to investigate companies. monitor price increasesPublic and coopera:
and order price freezes and reductions. These controls will be closely linke¢ to our industrialWe will use purle anc
4planning. through agreed development plans with the leading. price-setting firms. technical innovation. I
Take full account of these measures in the national ecanomuc assessment. la be agreed eachEncourage and he year with the Wade unions. The assessment will also take account of the impact of cost increasesfar more freedom to.
on the future rate of inflation. Return to puoiic; Value for moneysation of no more tha:
The Tories say that ‘competition’ ensures that shoppers get a fair deal. The customers knowsignificant public stake abetter. Stronger legal safeguards are essential to protect customers - not feast from shoddyand also in other umpo
4goods. And shoppers must know their rights and be able to enforce them. We will undertake an; Give generous enc urgent and comprehensive resiew of consumer law and reform it. We will also bring in newWe will establish a Co--; safeguards on advertising. We will: will be empowered to
Establish a major public service facility - a Product Research Unit - to test products andWe will give new right; manufacturers’ claims about them. and to publicise the results widely. Latour will also suppe. Set up consumer advice centres in all main shopping centres, with mobile units for ruraiPrevent the furthe:. areas.: industry can, through
-Provide simple court procedures for small claims. stronger trade codes of practice placed onWe will retain the five: to a statutory basis. and adequate penalties for trading offences, from UK production. -
See that all public enterprises give a high priority to dealing ‘aith consumer complaints andidustty.
needs - and hack them with stronger consumer councds. Develop our 493;
Introduce a code of advertising practice. on a statutory basis. to be administered by the officeand investment take pl.
‘of Fair Trading: and provide powers to order advertisements to be substantiated, withdrawn oras equals in the world
IEcorrected with equal prominence. major public enterpnse
IISupport the shiphs
REBUILDING OUR INDUSTRYinterests in merchant st qThe Tories have deen a disaster for British industry. Plants and companies have closed. skilledestablish th w British St: workers have been laid off. markets at home and abroad have been lost to our competitors. basi 's d ade nate resc
Industry has not invested enough. and it has failed to develop and exploit the new technologiesasis ana as successtully as other industrial countries. Telecommunications
We must rebuild our industrial strength - and we can do so under a Labour GovernmentA national cable svster working together with unions and managers, to plan Britain’s industrial development. Our aimreater varietv in the is not just to save companies and factories from closing down. We intend to create new companies2 dustry. But it must be and new science-based industries - using new public enterprise to lead the way. and supportedwill thus be given the
~by the development of industrial democracy. suey© ae anit
‘ \on,:.:;. Mercury, the new priv
“In our joint statement with the TUC. Economic Planning and Industrial Democracy. and intelecommunications anc
Labour's Programme l982. we show how it can be done. We will:.:7
Develop a new five-year national plan to coordinate expansion and public spending with plansSciand technolo for individual industries and regions. We will create a powerful new Department of Economic andSai ence 4 technology
Industrial Planning. see onde eed ce og:
{nvolve the trade unions and management in planning at every level with a new, tripartitehave un higher e ducatio
National Planning Council. vd dev ibe t nt than:
Link planning at all levels tirmly to a radical extension of industrial democracy. New statutory3O eve Seat overnm rights will enable workers to draw up plans for their own enterprise and sectors of industry, whichthe ‘all oe tout. t we will seek to incorporate into our strategy.© ' a hi * event. Make our planning flexible. so that it is able to respond quickly to changing circumstancestechnology has roug: and take full account of changing needs and preferences. We are opposed to any kind of rigidto "Ga Our coor lequat planning from the centre. But we will seek to develop a firm sense of strategic direction. Oo crab h Feats
Negotiate agreed development plans with all leading companies ~~ national and multinational, resen ne Nati TMm at Ie public and private - so that such companies play a constructive role in supporting the nationaluse the Nation w
Iplan and our plans for individual regions and sectors. erm wk ea het with
Support these agreed development plans with new industrial powers, including discretionaryork together wi y: LABOUR MANIFESTO. price controls. financial support and access to credit: and take powers to invest in individual wn. We completely reject thiscompanies. to purchase them outright of to assume temporary control.; i chberately. Our priority will be_ Monitor closely the activites of multinational companies. through a Foreign Investmenti ined to prevent soaring prices. Unit. All Ukbased multinationals will have to operate within clearly laid-down guidelines.:
sfare hold back prices. But weDevelop regional development plans. with plans also being drawn up at local level by local authorities. Regional development agencies will be established. extending our present commitnd subsidies on hasic products. ment to a Northern Development Agency to other English regions in need of them. These agencies will have similar powers and resources to those in Scotland and Wales We will also l]@ per cent since l979 - as aconsider using new regional jab subsidies.
Strengthen the NEB, the Scottish and Welsh Development Agencies. and the Industrial
+ Britain's withdrawal from theDevelopment Board in Northern Ireland. We will give them. and the new development agencies.
adequate resources for investment and acquisition.
‘anics, Monitor price increasesPublic and cooperative enterprise losely linked to our industrialWe will use public and cooperative enterprise to support our planning and as a major source of sesetting firms. technical innovation. We will:
assessment. to be agreed eachEncourage and help existing public enterprises to expand and diversify. They will be given of the impact of cost increasesfar more freedom to raise funds on capital markets.
Return to public ownership the public assets and nights hived off bv the Tories. with compenasation of no more than that received when the assets were denationalised. We will establish a ur ( A. The customers knowsignificant public stake in electronics. pharmaceuticals. health equipment and building materials.
efs not least from shoddyand also in other important sectors. as required in the national interest.
I ce them. We will undertake anGive generous encouragement and help to worker cooperatives and local enterprise boards.
I it, We will also bring in newWe will establish a Cooperative Investment Bank. The development agencies and local authorities will be empowered to support and to help establish cooperatives and local enterprise boards.
I hb Unit - to test products andWe will give new rights to workers to convert their firms into cooperatives.
I ely. Labour will also support kev industries in the public sector. We will:
s, with mobile units for ruralPrevent the further decline of both public and private sectors of the steel industry so that the industry can. through planned investment. meet the rising demand from econome expansion de codes of practice placed onWe will retain the five major BSC plants and see that a larger share of the home market is met from UK production. A major public presence will also be established in the steel stock-hoalding aith consumer complaints andindustry.
Develop our aerospace industries, We will ensure that proper levels of research. development ybe administered by the officeand investment take place. and that the industries have the capacity and skills needed to compete e substantiated. withdrawn oras equals in the world market The British Aerospace Corporation will be reestablished as a major public emterprise
Support the shipbuilding mdusiry, which is vital for a mariume nation such as Britam. with interests in merchan: shipping. the Navy. offshore oil and gas resources and fishing. Labour will ympanies have closed. skilledestablish a maritime strategy embracing both shipbuilding and shipping interests. We will Teen lost to our competitorsestablish the British Shipbuilding Corporation as a public sector company with a new financial exploit the new technologiesbasis and adequate resources for investment under a Labour GovernmentTelecommunications ‘; ae.
astrial development. Our aimA national cable system will make possible a wide range of new lelecommunications services.
ten” create new companiesgreater vanety in the provision of televison. and a major stimulus to British technology and led-che way. and supportedindustry. But it must be under firm public control. A publicly-owned British Telecommunications
°will thus be given the sole responsibility to create a national. broadband network (including
Industrial Democracy. and inMercury. the new privately-owned telecommunications system for business). which integrates. telecommunications and broadcasung.. nd public spending with plans
Deporiment of Economie andScience and technology
Science and technology are essential to Brinuin’s economic and social regeneration. The Tories
\ level with a new. tripartitehave undermined research and development in the scicnce-based research industries of the future.
Cuts in higher education threaten our fundamental research. Industry devotes less lO research la! democracy. New statutoryand development than anv other of our major industrial competitors. Defence accounts for over and sectors of industry. which8O per cent of government research funds in industry.: The fall im output. together with the Jach of planning and retraining. has meant that new
Not changing circumstancestechnology has brought major job insses in some sectors. Only Labour can plan new technologs opposed to any kind of ngidto meet Our commitmen: to fui! employment. We will:
of strategic direction. Guarantee adequate funding for higher education. the research councils and government
- national and multinational. research establishments. Co
Je in supporting the nationa! Use the National Investment Bank to channel funds from the financial institutions into longterm investment in new technology.
wers. including discretionaryWork together with trade unions to plan an expansion of new technology. in particular using
3l}7LABOUR MANIFESTO it to aid a product-based recovery of the economy. New technology agreements. tor propervoluntary retiremen:. safeguards and retraining for the work-force. will be extended. Pension age of A) -
Surengthen the links between research by higher education and industry to help greater.
industrial innovation. Equal rights at wor
Increase technological literacy in schools and give bovs and girls equal opportunities to studyLabour's aim is te « science and technology. discrimination, We +
Promote the supply of engineers and technicians, including women. to meet the needs ofExpand Posi:
industry and the community.. uees and introduce
Ensure that research and develooment are directed towards sociery’s needs. arch a reduchonArk.; in the present high proportion of defence research. a les
Promote the development snd use of aew information sad communication services to supportence tT; i wider demvcracy. progTammes through:’be hacked. if necesss
Finance for industryStrengthen the <: It ts essential that industry has the finance: t needs to support our plans for increased investment. will sheft che burden
Our proposals are set out in full in our Conference statement. The Financtal lasiitunons. We will: concept of indirect <
Establish a National Investment Bank to put mew resources from private insiitutions andvalue.
from the government - including North Sea od revenues - on a large scale inte our industrialEnd the distine::
4priorities. The bank will attract and channel savings. by agreement, in a way that guaranteesfates and conditions.
§these savings and improves the quality of investment in the UK. maternity leave.; Exercise. through the Bank of England. much closer direct control over bank lending. AgreedWe also aim to crez iadevelopment plans will be concluded with the banks and other financial institutions. Positive action progrs. ICreate a public bank operating through post offices. by merging the National Girobank.~
“National Savings Bank and the Paymaster General's Office.
Set up a Securities Commission to regulate the instituuions and markets of the City. includingENERGY
Llovds. within a clear statutory framework. Energy is vital to our
IIntroduce a new Pension Schemes Act to strengthen members’ rights in occupational pensioncarefully and save mcschemes. clanfv the role of trustees. and give members a right to equal representation. throughEnsure that ever:
’their trade unions, on controlling bodies of the schemes. Give priority to t. Set up a tripartite investment monitoring agency to advise trustees and encourage improve-the tripartite machines ments in investment practices and strategies. repiace old plant with
We expect the major clearing banks to cooperate with us fully on these reforms, in the nationalAssist major tow:
interest. However. should they fail to do so. we shall stand ready to take one or more of them_ Begin a massive.
into public ownership. This will not in any way affect the integrity of customers’ deposits. incentives to industry: Energy Conservation: Greatly increase:
qEMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING, Stop Sizewell ars, The long-term unemployed - the men and women who have sutfered most from the Toryprogramme based on - onslaught - will benefit directly from economic expansion and our policies on regional developRe-establish the I
I‘ment. But special measures are also needed. By the end of our first five years, our aim is thatcomprehensive energs; noone will be out of work for more than a year without receiving an offer of a job or trainingTransfer the whel: place. Energy costs now repi: We will act quickly to save jobs and stop the further destruction of industry. We will expandboth by conservation:, the schemes for compensating firms that avoid redundancy and provide temporary jobs for theWe will bring Britc long-term unemployed. We will widen the Job Release Scheme and offer employment subsidiespowerful national oil c; to firms. linked to agreements with them to preserve and create jobs. We will also provide majorWe will restore to the lincreases in youth and adult training. with special provision for women. ethnic minonties and the: l978, and. in line witt i )disabled: and integrate a reformed Youth Training Scheme into our scheme tor a two-yearthe public sector will b; student-traineeship. in the North Sea. We
Industry has been badly hit by the collapse of training under the Tories. Expansion must notBritish Petroleum. in < be held back by shortages of skilled labour: and peaple without work must have the skills needed qto take up the available jobs. We will:
Introduce a new statutory framework. linking adult training with initial training. This willFOOO, FISHING AND also place a statutory duty on employers to carry out training and establish joint workplaceBritain needs a food a training committees. Adequate funds will be provided jointly by industry and government. of the prime reasons {
Give the Manpower Services Commission the authority and resources it needs to do the job. Agricultural Policy, w
The commission will develop its regional and local structures. advise companies on their plans. where necessary, with for manpower, and get advance notice of redundancies. As we describe in £; Ensure that the MSC develops a national job centre network and reverses the cutbacks inindustry, after consult.
occupational guidance and help for disadvantaged job seekers. We will take urgent steps tothe industry. Labour abolish private employment agencies.: nations: establish com:
Working time in Britain, over the life-time of individual workers. is among the highest ia industrialextend marketing boat countries. We will work through collective bargaining to reduce working time: and this willTogether with the tr:
include more flexible working arrangements. more time off for study, longer holidays. earlierearnings, and replace I
# - i}i}I
LABOUR MANIFESTO chnology agreements. for propervoluntary retirement with adequate pensions - with progress towards our aim of a commonI pension age of 6O - and a 35 hour week lOn and industry to help greaterEquat rights at work_ girls equal opportunities to studsLabour's aim is to create equal rights at work for women and to overcome the effects of past
2discrimination. We will:
ig Women, to meet the needs of Expand Positive Action Programmes to eliminate discrimination, change employment practices and introduce special training schemes to equip women to enter non-traditional areas ofI. society's needs. with a reductionwork.. Carry out these programmes throughout the public sector. ensure that public-sector contracts ommunication services to supportinclude a commument to positive action. and press employers and unions to negotiate theseI programmes through joint equal opportunities committees at the workplace. These proposals will:
he backed. if necessary. by a statutory duty on employers. i
Strengthen the Sex Discrimination and Equal Pay Acts to make them more effective. WeI ir plans for increased investment. will shift the burden of proof from the complainant to the alleged discriminator. incorporate the he Financial Institutions. We will: concept of indirect discrimination and introduce the principle of equal pav for work of equal ses from private institutions andvalue. I la large scale into our industrialEnd the distinction between part-time and full-time workers in terms of rights. hourly payI vmgss, in a way that pudranicestates and conditions. and extend greater employment protection to homeworkers and women onI. C; maternity leave.;
‘onthe over bank lending. AgreedWe also aim to create equality of opportunity and treatment for black workers. and similar financial institutions. positive action programmes will be carried through on their behalf.
merging the National 'Girobank.°I ind markets of the City. includingENERGYI
Energy is vital to our future as an industrial nation. We will plan its supply and demand more its’ rights in occupational pensioncarefully and save more of the energy we use. As outlined in Labour's Programme l982. we will:
to equal representation. through‘Ensure that everyone can afford adequate heat and light at home.
Give priority to the coal industry and the use of coal as a fuel. We will seek ta reestablish irustees and encourage improve-the tripartite machinery set up under Labour and prepare a new Plan for Coal. We will also replace old plant with coal-fired stations. l on these reforms. in the nationalAssist major towns and cities to set up combined heat and power schemes.
idy lO take one or more of them___ Begin a massive conservation programme. ied by insulation for council housing. and givingI
“ity of customers’ deposits. incentives to industry on agreed plans to save energy. The programme will be managed by a newI
Enerev Conservation Agency.
Greatly increase spending on the development of renewable sources. i
Stop Sizewell and scrap the Tory PWR programme. The need for a continuing nuclearI
« suffered most from, the Tory. programme based on the British AGR will be reassessed when we come lO office.
our policies on regional developRe-establish the Energy Commission to advise on the preparation and annual review of a r first five vears. our aim is thatcomprehensive energy pian.
ing an offer of a job or trainingTransfer the whole of the National Nuclear Corporation to the public sector.
Energy costs now represent a major part of family budgets. We will aim to reduce these costs.
uon of industry. We will expandboth by conservation and by introducing new fue! allowances.;
2 preside temporary jabs for theWe will bring Britoil back into public ownership and combine it with BNOC to create a: aC fer employment subsidiespowerful national oil corporation with full powers lO engage in all aspects of oil-related activines. I jobs. We will also provide majorWe will restore to the new corporation a minimum 5O per cent stake in all fields discovered since women, ethnic minorities and thel978: and. in line with our objective to bring North Sea oil into public ownership and control.
inte our scheme for a two-vear'the public sector will have the dominant role in al! future oil and gas exploration and developmen{ in the North Sea. We reaffirm our commitment tc achieving full public control and ownership ofI the Tories. Expansion must natBritish Petroleum. in order to make it an effective agent of a nationally directed oil policy.
work must have the skills needec; ag with initial traimng: This willFOOD, FISHING AND AGRICULTURE i@ and establish joint workpiaceBritain needs a food and agriculture policy much more in line with our needs - and this is oneI
\ industry and governmentof the prime reasons for leaving the EEC. Instead of the inflated prices of the EEC’s Common resources it needs to do the jabAgricultural Policy. we will support our agriculture through deficiency payments - cauplec.
advise Companies on their planswhere necessary. with limited intervention busing and direct income supper.‘: As we describe in Labour's Programme l982. we will conduct an ‘annua. assessment OF ihe
Th and reverses the cutbacks inindustry. after consultation with all those concerned. This will set the level of support giver. lO s. We will take urgent steps tothe industry. Labour will also negotiate long-term supply agreements with agricultura) producing nations: establish commodity agencies and support marketing cooperatives; and. where helpiul.
is among the highest in industrial: extend marketing boards to other sectors.; a industria!
uce working time: and this willTogether with the trade unions we will work to close the gap between agricultural and in usit r study. longer holidays. earlierearnings. and replace the Agricultural Wages Board with a statutory joint industrial council. We
3l3I
I 'II posLABOUR MANIFESTO. will also act to improve farm safety, provide statutory support for workers’ safety representatives, Give more supr I, 4and end pay discrimination against women workers. d<.: eneiieies: Lo,.. procedures in cases. I
‘We will give a new deal to the fishing industrv. We will draw up a National Fisheries Plan soImprove anten: I omas to take full advantage of our withdrawal from the EEC. We will also provide public investmentSupport the pre:
jfor the industry and improved conditions of employment - including safety conditions - andVhile continuI
§introduce 2 licensing system for registered fishing vessels and ‘ishermen. V hile continuing te i
’We will end the derating of agricultural land. We will also defend the agricultural environmentimproke NHS facili: I
3by giving a aew priority to the effect on the environment of our agneultural policies. We willwe will remove bars: I
3make all agricultural aid subject to environmental critesia and extend development sontrols totermination of a pre:; agriculture.:
4We shall take tougher measures to control the use of pesticides and herbicides. We shallFAIR SHARES establish a body with statutory powers to supervise Ineir dse. ind in taricular we shail bon theOur plan forexpansi I. use af 243T, We shail strengthen coatrais on the use of addiuves in feecetutfs. and in Sood. andtaxation so that thes
Aensure better labelling. progressively increas: I
-Our aim is to make it easier for new entrants. such as voung farmers. lO come into the industrythose on average 2at I
’and obtain a tenancy. We will do this with the help of a new Rural Land Authority, which willof tax. and to remor; I
Fadminister rural land already publicly-owned and begin to ectead public ownership to tenantedIn Labour's Progr. I land. action on family trust I
“4For the forestry industry. we intend tu reconstitute the Forestry Commission, as described inavailability to higher- I
‘Labour's Porgramme (982. so that it operates as an expanding public enterprise. The commissionon legal tax evasion I would cease to act as a spokesman for the private sector. and it will be expected to extend itsWe shall also retfor activities to include the processing side of the industry. We will also seek to increase tree plantings. rates for essentials ar
Capital taxes will >- I
4most of the Tories’ < I
JA BETTER DEAL FOR WOMENpersonal wealth, sion: Labour's objective is to achieve equality between women and men. Over half the population arerichest lOO, OOO of the I women; yet in our society. paid employment is seen as important while domestic skills - involving qcaring for children ~ do not enjoy their proper status. Women should have a genuine choiceHELPING FAMILIES I; between staving at home to look after the family or going to work. Men and women should beLabour will give fam: i: able to share the rights and responsibilities of paid employment and domestic activities. so thatorder to support ther I; job segregation within and outside the home is broken down. the type and size of {2
4Tory attacks on women’s rights and opportunities have more than doubled the numbers ofthey reduce the freez
Funemployed women and destroved services which women in particular depend upon. Labour willlook after their fami do more than reverse these policies. We will: poverty through a co: I qExpand current positive action programmes as well as introduce wide-ranging new schemesthe lowest paid.
ain order to encourage women to train and apply for new job opportunities. particularly in theWe aim to recast t i: area of new technology... children. Our priority I: Provide equal pay for work of equal value by amending the Equal Pay Act: and take action. and subsequently imr itogether with the trade unions, against low pay._eeto raise child benefit.: Strengthen the Sex Discrimination Act to include direct and indirect discrimination on thealso restore the rights I grounds of family status, and shift the burden of proof from the complainant to the allegedand give extra help tc I. discriminator..: We shail continue I qStrengthen and expand the role of the Equal Opportunities Commission. By increasing per: I
Restore and extend women's employment rights to include part-time and home-workers. By making furthe- I
Reverse the Tory attack on employment, social services and maternity rights. Bv extending anc I; Improve the level of financial support to families with children and disabled dependants. The:.: f.:: tepeople.: household duties test will be abolished. Extra help will be given to one-parent families. i+ for thes
Establish an integrated system of child care with priority for children in the most deprivedTo help pay for 4 hte:
Pareas. Our aim will be to introduce. as soon as possible. a statutory duty on local authorities tomarries ands 8.. a aprovide nursery education for ail pre-school children whose parents wish it. with ¢ epenc how ‘te 4
Take steps to end discrimination in education and training. as set out in Labour's Programmefor those wit out; ore; l922.-year. However. we re
Provide the resources to make a major improvement in the personal social services for thethose couples where © care of elderly. sick and disabled people. occ ane sn taxat
Within the NHS, improve community services, extend preventive measures includingbent to im ke tent this I screening, and develop child health services. st to imple
[Increase the maternity grant to at least £lOO. A new deal for pensi I: Provide fair treatment for widows. We believe that elderly
Increase the death grant to at least £2OO. from labour's pension - I jWork to establish equal treatment in tax and social security. Uprate the pensio: I
3End VAT on sanitary protection. against the rise in infla: I jAppoint a cabinet minister to promote equality between the sexes. Increase pensions.
}Review the whole question of divorce and maintenance. couple. This is the am
Establish a fairer system of family law, and introduce Family Courts. pensions and earnings.
j3l4!!
’I- 8.~ eo: I 'I iLABOUR MANIFESTO: I rkers’ safety representatives. IGive more support for victims of rape: and provide an urgent review of police and courti I ip a National Fisheries Plan so! Procedures in cases of rape and violence against women.:
also provide public investmentImprove ante-natal and maternity services. and respect the wishes of women in childbirth. to ading safety conditions - andSupport the provision of family crisis centres and more refuges for battered women. o
‘rmen.,’ While continuing to defend and respect the absolute right of individual conscience. we willae d the agricultural environmentimprove NHS facilities for family planning and abortion. including counselling and day-care: andi agricultural policies. We willwe will remove barriers to the implementation of the existing right of choice for women in the tend development controls totermination of a pregnancy. I des and herbicides. We shallFAIR SHARESI in particular we shall ban theOur plan for expansion must be supported bv measures to create a fairer Britain. We shall reformoi
O feedstuffs, and in food. andtaxation so that the rich pay their full share and the tax burden on the lower paid is reduced. ByI; progressively increasing the real value of the personal allowance. we will help the lower paid and7 ers. lO Come into the industrythose on average earnings. We intend also to bring down the starting point of the highest ratesi
I Land Authority. which willof tax. and to remove the present ceiling on earnings-related National Insurance contributions. ry public ownership to tenantedIn Labour's Programme l982. we explain how we will reduce tax avoidance. This will includei, action on family trusts and children’s investment income. We also intend to limit the open-ended
Commission, as described inavailability to higher-rate tax pavers of various tax reliefs. A determined attack will be mountedI iC enterprise. The commissionon illegal tax evasion. i cel Increase’ to extend itsWe shall also reform indirect taxation. We will extend zero-rating under VAT. with differen:
eeh__ increase tree plantings. rates for essentials and non-essentials. i
Capital taxes will be used to reduce the huge inequalities in inherited wealth. We shall reverseI most of the Tories’ concessions on capital transfer tax and introduce a new annual tax on net personal wealth. along the lines set out in Labour's Programme l982. This will ensure that the
Over half the population arerichest lOO, OOO of the population make a fair and proper contribution to tax revenue.
ile domestic skills - involving hould have @ genuine choiceHELPING FAMILIES d doers omen should be‘Labour will give families a better deal. Our first priority will be to help families with children inI. order to support them in the task of parenthood. The Tories refuse to accept the wide variety inI ian doubled the numbers ofthe tvpe and size of families. Their policies restrict choice for members of families - in particularI
‘ar depend upon. Labour willthey reduce the freedom of men and women to choose whether to work or to stay at home and look after their families. At the same time. Tory policy has trapped more and more families ini
€ wide-ranging new schemesoven pe a combination of means-tested benefits and tax system which bites hardest onI
Trenies. particularly in theWe aim to recast the tax and benefit svstem. so as to redistribute resources to families withI aal Pay Act: and take actionchildren. Our priority is chiid benefit, We wall increase iT by £2. OO a week, make Wf index-linked. I.: and subsequently improve it in real terms. as resources allow. In the longer term. we shali aim idirect discrimination on theto raise child benefit to the level of child support given to those on long-term benefits We shallI complainant lO the allegedalso restore the fights to weekly payment of child benefit: mcrease the maternity grant to £lOC:
and give extra help to one-parent families. I namission. We shall contunue to help family budgets throughout the parliament: I
-time and home-workers. By increasing personal tax allowances - thus taking the poorest famihes out of the tax net. i nernity rights. By making further increased in child benefit:
ad ian dependants. Theeopie extending and improving the Invalid Care Allowance for those who care for disabled ond__/ent families..
iildren in the most deprivedTo help pay for these improvements we shall. over the lifetime of the parliament. phase out the dutv on local authorities tomarried man’s additional tax allowance for those under the age of retirement. Married couples wish it. with dependants will clearly benefit considerably from these changes - whilst the overall change ou: in Labour's Programmefor those without dependants. given the increases in personal allowance, will be small in any one year. However. we recognise that the joss of the allowance could cause financial difficulty for sonal social services for thethose couples where one of the spouses is not in work. We shall therefore consider how best tol give support to these married couples where there are no dependants. Our aim is to end sexI venuve Measures including. fiscnmination in taxation We favour the principle of separate taxation and are examining how nest to implement this.
A new deal for pensionersI
We believe thai eiderly people. both today's pensioners as well as those who will benefit in furureI trom labour’s pension scheme. should share ay of mghi im our future prosperity. We shailI; Upraie the pension in November l963 by the full amount necessary to protect sts real valueI
2against the rise in inflation to that date.; I. Increase pensions. as soon as practicable. by £l.45 for a single person and £2.25 for a married urtscouple. This is the amount pensioners have lost through the Tories breaking the link betweenI
-pensions and earnings.
3l5I glLABOUR MANIFESTO:
‘Link pensions and average earnings. when these are rising faster than prices. and extend thisbenefit schemes. ail I to all benefits. we ail replace them
Make progress towards our aim of a common pension age of 4O. Forty vears have ¢:
Double the Christmas bonus ta £2O.[Insurance scheme >.
4Phase out the TV licence for pensioners, during the lifetime of the Labour government. the scheme inte cb; Give women the additional tax allowance for the elderly - “he age allowance - hae insteadI
Fat As,
Increase the Death Grant to £24) and exiend a to cover all deaths, The aeaton oF he
Introduce a Pension Schemes Act that will more adequately protect eccupational pensionsPanty ft now faces;
4trom the effects of inflauion than they are at present: protect the position of early leavers: andand che active en sgt extend to members of schemes. rights to participation and to greater information. of the service. Ne an
Introduce. in areas where more favourable concessionary travel on local transpert does notthat. nenty denen bg; exist, a nationwide. off-peak. hail-fares scheme for pensioners., To meet nsins “Dost
4Reform the harsh supplementary penefit rules introduced 7s the Tories. populason and to. 7 ‘
Reduce energy costs. for pensioners. both through support Jor conservation and by introdu-increase health vervice I cing new fuel allowances. fairer distribution of - \ crint] Pa. I
Help for the unempioyedeaneeee We charges De I. Working people are entitled to a decent income when they lose their job through circumstancesand we wil discuss ait? I
‘ 4bevond their control. An improved earnings-related supptement will once again be paid duringdisputesan sthe first months of unemployment. We shall end the discrimination whereby the unemployed areSor ywernding um; not entitled to the long-term rate of supplementary benefit after a vear. We shall also considerit. We aul: o I
4how best to improve unemployment benefit for the longer-term unemploved so that large-scale: Gne greater exph i supplementation ts not required. will come forward alt
Help for people with disabilitiesads eee rity to
4The last Labour government established. for the first time. the basis for eliminating povertyComteue te ~ alk among disabled people. We intend to build on this. We will: a SoRRUe fe er; Introduce a £lO a week blindness allowance. as a first step tow ards the introduction of a newservices. and “es ‘are cash benefit for disabled people, which will sary according to the degree of disability. Reco uce “n incepe
Bring up the non-contributory invalidity pension to the level of the flat-rate contributorydf eohiee t ne veer; invalidity benefit, and restore the 4 per cent cut in invalidity benetit. an abolish in ee at
Help the many disabled people who are capable of working part-time or for limited periods. Tak. 3 ma ore Ah: but discouraged by present benefit regulations. We shall amend these to take account of theiravailable are wate cee; needs. coo
Abolish the household duties test for housewives’ non-contributory invalidity pension andThe Present expansion ir extend invalid care allowance to all those women presents excluded. will not allow the devele
Continue to pay mobility allowance to existing recipients as they reach the age of 75. We shall remove priate
Ensure the full implementation of the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act. making private sectcr an.
For those who require long-term care - elderly, mentally handicapped, mentaily ill andconsultants who make a disabled people - develop services within both the health service and the local authority services, those choosing to work «:
based on support for them and their families within the community._ While continuing so ¢:
Make proper provision for the 2O per cent of children requiring various forms of specialimprove NHS facilities to education. We will promote and provide the resources for the integration within mainstreamwe will remove darrers:
)schooling of those children whose needs are best met by ordinary schools. termination of a pregnan.
-Labour will also aim to overcome discrimination against the disabled at work. We will reversePersonal social service: I the Tory cuts. which have caused unnecessary suffering for people with disabilities. We shallPersonal social services ~ I increase the number of disablement resettlement officers: extend capital grants to adaptday care for the elderly - I employer's premises; strengthen existing schemes -~ especially rehabilitation - to help disabledwho are mest vulnerable I: people back to work. and introduce new legislation. including quotas. to secure employmentThe Tory cuts in the sc dopportunities and job protection for disabled people. many women and 3 loss « home as unpaid carers. A I
4A fairer benefit systemonly to raise the standard
4The new supplementary benefit scheme introduced by the Tories is harsh and unfair. We shallequal right to work. Labo: I jreform it. The families of those involved in industrial disputes will be entitled to full benefits -can complement the muct i less any strike pay actually paid. We shall return to a sliding scale for assessing capital and theincreasing spending by ati I surrender value of insurance policies will be exctuded. The anomaly which prevents some widowsIncrease joint finance I from claiming long-term supplementary benefit will be removed. We shall give extra help toRequire social service lfamilies with children. education and health auth. I
We shall improve staffing levels and physical conditions in social security offices so as to provide; Strengthen the Chron: I a more humane and responsive service for claimants. Many people fail to claim benefit to which: Rights for disabled people they are entitled. We shall aim to increase takeup by improvements in publicity and the provisionRequire focal authorit: I of advice. Give greater attention I
All the social security changes made by the Tories. including the new sick pay and housingEncourage the growth I
3l6II
IILABOUR MANIFESTOI
‘I than prices. and extend thisIbenefit schemes, will be reviewed. If they do not treat working people and their families fairly I we will replace them.~I
4, Forty years have clapsed since the Beveridge Report which led to the setting up of the NationalInsurance scheme by the post-war Labour government. We shall conduct a thorough review of the Labour government. the scheme in the light of today’s circumstances.
ige allowance - at O instead aths. THE RIGHT TO HEALTH CARE
‘totect occupational pensionsThe creation of the National Health Service is one of the greatest achievements of the Labour sosition of early leavers: andParty. It now faces a double threat from the Tories: a lack of resources for decent health care: I
+ information. and the active encouragement of private practice. Labour will act to defend the basic principles
Lon local transport does notof the service. We will ensure that it is free at the point of use and funded out of taxation. andI; that priority depends on medical need not ability to pay.
« Tones. To meet rising costs due to improved medical technology and the age composition of the conservation and by introdu-population. and to allow for a general expansion of our under-funded health services, we shall: increase health service expenditure by 3 per cent per annum in real terms. We will also seek a fairer distribution of these resources at both regional and district level. Since the election.; prescription charges have increased fram 2Op to £l 4O per item. Labour will phase out health irthrough circumstancescharges. We shall also ensure that NHS staff receive a fair reward for their work and dedication:
qt CY again be paid duringand we will discuss with the TUC new arrangements for pay determination and the resolution of;., isputes.
Near We chal anbosed areit oer overriding aim will be to reduce inequalities in standards of health care for all who need employed so that large-scaleGive greater emphasis to prevention. both within the health and personal social services. We will come forward with proposals to help prevent accidents and disease. including action onI advertising. I vasis for eliminating povertyGive priority to improving our primary health care services. especially in the inner cities. I
°Continue to improve the ante-natal and maternity services and develop our child health rds the introduction of a newservices: and we will respect the wishes of women in child birth. I ogree of disability. Introduce an independent complaints system in both hospital and family practitioner services.
of the flat-rate contributoryRecognise the importance of community health councils and ensure that thes have the powerI.. and facilities to represent fully the consumer point of view.
Itime or for limited periods. Abolish the special charges for overseas visitors. and end passport checks. I ese to take account of their_Take a major public stake in the pharmaceutical industry - and ensure that the drugs available are safe. effective and economic.
ulory invalidity pension andThe present expansion in private medicine ts a serious threat lO our priorities in health care. WeI iwill nat allow the development of a two-tier health service. where the rich can jump the queue.
) reach the age of 75. We shall remove private practice from the NHS and take into the NHS those parts of the profitI cabled Persons Act. making private sector and prevent it expanding further. We will give proper recognition to those indicapped. mentally il! andconsultants who make a full-time commitment to the NHS: and we will provide incentives tc ithe local authority services. those choosing to work in under-doctored areas and specialities:. While continuing to defend and respect the absolute right of individual conscience. we will; ing various forms of specialimprove NHS facilities for family planning and abortion. including counselling and day-care: andI tegration within mainstreamwe will remove barriers to the implementation of the existing right of choice for women in theI
@)termination of a pregnancy. I ed at work. We will reversePersonal social! servicesI
€ with disabilities. We shallPersonal social services -- such as childcare. home helps. meals on wheels and residential and nd capital grants to adaptday care for the elderly and handicapped. are a vital part of our welfare state. And it is thoseI bilitauon - to help disabledwho are most vulnerable in our society who depend most upon themI
Otas, lo secure employmentThe Tory cuts in the social services have hit women hardest. Thex have meant lost jobs for many women and a loss of support for the elderly and disabled. thus forcing women to sta\ atI home as unpaid carers. A major improvement in personal social services will be necessary. notI only to raise the standard of living of those who depend upon them. but also to give women an s harsh and unfair. We shallequal right to work. Labour will reverse the Tory cuts. improve and expand services so that they; ne entitled to full benefits -can complement the much better community health services we shall provide. This will involve for assessing capital and theincreasing spending by at least 4 per cent a vear in real terms. We wil!; whi prevents some widowsIncrease joint finance and extend it to cover other agenciesl
We shall give extra heip teRequire socia! services depar: ments to plan and develop services for children rointh with:
education and heaith authorities. I curity offices so as to provideStrengthen the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act so that it provides a Charter of' fail to claim benefit to whichRights for disabled people evervwhere.‘ in publicity and the provisionRequire local authorities to develop preventive services for children at risk.
Give greater attention to the needs of ethnic minorities.
€ new sick pay and housingEncourage the growth of local. independent advice and advocacy services.
3l7,
Ce{
EDUCATION FOR THE FUTUREAdult education:
If individuals are to achieve their full creative potential, and our society is to advance. we mustWe are determined to 2 I substantially improve educational provision and opportunity. The Tories’ cuts have shown thatleaving school. We will I they have no commitment to a free and fair education system. The fact is. however. that economicGive statutory backir I and social progress will depend on our success in making use of the atuiities of the whole of ourPhase inanew. aduls I population. by tingnent surpurt ter a. I
For the under- fives, dur goal is to aghtese comprehensive provision acta ore cines for childrenRegie sca. whoa:
inthe most deprived areas. We will unify education and care services ior the under-fives, bethMetnods oF stds.
nationally and iocaily. Our aim will be to intraduce 4 statutory dun on local autherities to provideEstabltsh a proper ‘c I fursery education. as soon as possible. for all pre-school children whose parents wish itpromote adult and contin. I
Schools in the community. the Establish machinery: I
Primary education is fundamental to al! educational and social development, as ams parent knows, edueauon. are more aceon
We «ill restore funds to local education authorities to reduce ciass yizes: and improve learningI materials and facilines in primary schools so that our children receive the best possible start in. A NEW DEAL FOR YOUt; Secondary educauon is a period during which all young people must prepare themselves as thea oh wil ene th. wat: workers and citizens of the future. We shall encourage a higher standard of achievement amongjoOs O we vai news at. all pupils in the variety of academic and other activities which are essential parts of fullyforall l6 and t? ¥ a elds.
C)comprehensive education. We will: whe: ne r an aRepeal the Education Act l979 and prohibit all forms of academic selection. such as theod “fr traraing h ie de:
eleven plus. as a condition of admission to secondary schools. e ucation in xe ools and <
Ratinaenee. aGive to voung people I equire local education authorities to maintain a broad. balanced and comprehensive- Emplovers will be en:
curriculum, providing genuinely equal opportunities for boys and girls. and for the ethnic minori-pay. ‘ me ” erstie I ties to meet the needs of our multi-cultural society. P, receive ah be oad eau I
Establish a common system of assessment for all l6 year olds which will encourage effortrere olish th, lied” and accurately record achievement at school. Labour rejects corel etek I
Throughout the whole of schooling, we will: jobs
Determine a supply of appropriately qualified teachers to reduce class sizes. No class sizeOffer ail voung pees.
should be over 3O. The quality and frequency of teacher inservice training must he improved soeducation and training cee that teachers receive no less than one school term of training in every five years of service. the trade unions: and give I
Discuss with the local authorities ways of developing a reformed system tor funding education. be avreed annually with th: I
Whilst safeguarding local democracy in education. this must secure and maintain improvedProvide student-traine:
national standards of provision in essential areas. of £25 a week. at l983 pre I
Abolish corporal punishment; and help local authorities and schools to Jevelop otherLabour will establish new + I methods. already successfully practised in many schools. for dealing with bad behav tour./ Expand and improve: I
Positively encourage parental understanding and participation in the education of theirneeds young people -. I children by increasing parental representation on school governing bodies and increasing the linksthe voung disabledij between home and school.‘Establish a “youth int: I
Reestablish the school meals and milk services, cut back by the Tories. This will help towhich represent voung peo: I offset the inequalities. for ecample in nutrition. highlighted by the Black Report. Encourage local author
Private schools are a major obstacle to a free and fair education system. able to serve the needsof enabling voung people * of the whole community. We will abolish the Assisted Places Scheme and local authority placeExpand funding and si buying: and we will phase out. as quickly as possible. boarding allowances paid to governmentin vouth clubs and schools
C)personnel for their children to attend private schools, whilst ensuring secure accommodation tortrade union rights and resco I children needing residential education. be involved with seconds.
We shall also withdraw charitable status from private schools and afl their other public subsidiesfor such representatives at - I and tax privileges. We will also charge VAT on the fees paid to such schools: phase out feeI changing; and integrate private schools within the local authority sector where necessary. SpecialHOMES FOR EVERYONE I schools for handicapped pupils will retain all current support and tax advantages. Britain faces a major housir I
Post l6 educationand house building ts at its I iFor l6 and l7 year olds, we will introduce a two years’ student-traineeship within a third orthey can be repaired. while
{‘tertiary’. stage of education, as described in the section on young people. A ‘tertiary awardsthis decline. Our aim is a d:: council’ will be established to develop and validate a proper system of educational assessmentowning. on terms people ca:
ifor the whole of the age group. Our aim is to replace the rigid “A level system with a broaderLabour governments have programme of study within the student-traineeship, thus preventing over-specialisation andextend this by giving specia!
promoting flexibility and breadth in learning. Labour will immediately
Our policy for education after eighteen is expansion with change. We will reverse the Tory cuts: authorities. This will be a and restore the right for all qualified young people seeking higher education to secure places. WeFimprovements and for new: wiil also substantially expand opportunities for adults in both further and higher education. Igetting empty council ownec; We reject the Tory proposals for student loans: and we will ensure students are given adequate‘grant and area improvemen:
financial support. We will also provide proper financial support for those on non-advanced, part-and better housing and envi: I time advanced, and Open University courses. made for hitherto neglected -
3l8II
II: I: I eEEEeEEE TTT
\t I
LABOUR MANIFESTOi I aAdult education,
Ur soctely Is to advance, we mustWe are determined to give priority to adults who have been denied educational opportunity on“4
The Tories’ cuts have shown thatleaving school We will:,:
ne fact is. however, that economicGive statutory backing to paid educational leave for workers.
f the abilities of the whole of ourPhase in a new, adult educational entitlement that will provide one year of education. backed.. by financial support for adults who have never received education after eighteen.
vision. with priorities for children{Require educational institutions fo be more flexible in their admissions procedures and services for the under-fives, bothImethods of study.
4ty on local authorities to provideEstabhsh a proper legal basis for adult education: and create a development council to en whose parents wish it. promote adult and continuing education.
IEstablish machinery to plan and coordinate all post l8education together and ensure that velopment, as any parent knows\the bodies funding universities. and planning loca! authority further. higher and continuing class sizes: and improve learningeducation. are more accountable and representative..£I receive the best possible start inA NEW DEAL FOR YOUNG PEOPLEI
_ Must prepare themselves as theLabour will end the scourge of youth unemployment and prepare young people ta take up the standard of achievement amangjobs that we will create. We will also encourage all young people in employment to join a trade uch are essential parts of fullunion. Our radical new scheme for young people will establish a new. two year student-traineeship: for al! l6 and l7 year olds [l will bring together. for the first time. the first vears of apprenticeships.\ acaggemic selection. such as theother traming schemes for young workers and the voung unemployed and courses in full-umeI education in schools and colleges We will: I i. brdnced and comprehensiveGive te young people who are at work the right to be released to college or school, on fuil
‘ girls. and for the ethnic minori-pay. Employers will be given a statutory duty to provide opportunities for their young empioyeesI to receive systematic education and training and to release student-trainees at their requesi.
ds whiFPremiums will be paid to them to recruit young people and provide them with such opportunities ies which will encourage effort: Abolish the socalled Young Workers’ Scheme. set up by the Tories to reduce vouth wages. I
Labour rejects completely the Tory argument that voung people have priced themselves out of:
reduce class sizes. No class sizejobs. P. ws:
ce training must he improve 4 soOffer all young people without work a place on new youth training schemes. with proper every five vears of service. education and training opportumties - which can best be guaranteed by active monitoring by ed svstem for funding educatiothe trade unions: and give them an allowance of at feast £3O per week - the level of which willi secure and maintain; onbe agreed annually with the TUC - with trade unions being free to negotiate better terms nd maintain improvedProvide student-trainees. in full-time education, with an educational maintenance allowance and schools to develop otherof £25 a week. at l983 prices. covering 52 weeks in a year.
ing with bad behaviour. iLabour will establish new rights and provide more resources for youth. We will: i tion in the education of theirExpand and improve the vouth service so that It meets the social. cultural and recreational g bodies and increasing the linksneeds of young people - especially the unemployed. young women. the ethnic minorities ane the voung disabied.;
% the Tones This wil! help toEstablish a ‘youth initiates fund’ to give greater recognition and support to organisations;.¢ Black Report. which represent voung people $ interest.;; I svstem., able to serve the needEncourage local authorities to support representative local vouth councils as one of the meansI heme an d local authority a *of enabling young peaple to influence public affairs as young adults.7 allowances paid to overnment__ Expand funding and staffing for the provision of social studies and education for citizenship wine securegovernmenin youth clubs and schools with the aim of informing voung people of their civil. political and
£ sécure accommodation fortrade union rights and responsibilities as citizens. Accredited trade union representatives should d C):: aibe involved with secondary schoo! students in the context of such education. with full facilines a\_eir other public subsidiesfor such representatives at all career days. I to such schools: phase out fee,:
sector where necessary. SpecialHOMES FOR EVERYONEI tax advantages. Britain faces a major housing crisis. The Tories have slashed public spending on housing by haifI and house building ts at its lowest since the l92Os. Houses are falling into disrepair faster thanI utraineeship within a third orthey can be repaired. while homelessness and waiting lists continue to grow. Labour will reverse ing people. A ‘ternary awardsthis decline. Qur aim l a decen: home for all with real freedom of choice between renting and tem of educetional assessmentowning. on terms people can afford
A level sysiem with a broaderLabour governments have done more than any others to assist owner occupiers: and we will: I enting over-specialisation andextend this by giving special assistance to first-time buvers and council tenants. I
Labour will immediately increase bv half the total housing investment programmes for jozaiI
We will reverse the Torv cutsauthorines This will be a first step im increasing resources for counci! housing reparts andty
CGUcalion l6 secure places Weimprovements anc lor new pubnc sector house building. We will also ge a new pnorin tc, I her and hignes education.: getting empty council owned housing back into use. We will overhaul and extend the renovation ire Students are given adequate, grant and area improvement programme to tackle properly the decay of our older houses. New tT those on non-advanced. part-and better housing and environmental standards will be developed and greater provision will bej made for hitherto neglected groups. such as single people. i
3l9I
IiI
Councit housing. and private fandiord. 7: I
The Tories have forced council rents to more than double. The number of council homes for rentroutine repairs done
3is falling because of the rundown of new building and enforced sales. Thousands have to copeorganisations these “ar: I with leaking roofs and damp. inadequate heating. broken down lifts. noise. lack of security. included. but the Lake increasing disrepair and neglect..-;; larger capital investmer I
ILabour wiil give council tenants a new deal. In addition to 4 freeze on rents tor a full vear, We also intend to re. I and the restoration of subsidies. Labour will: Tribunal will he estes, fund a national action programme to repair and improve or replace run-down estates, commuttees. as an ae. I especially the vstem-built Zevelegments in which so many defects have Deed reseuted. cee; Strengthen fenanis” gis on security. repairs und iMprovemenio, aeegss lu Mes. exchanges, I
4Wansiers Moves cetveed cal aurhemey areas. and rehousing mgnts oa Preaxdew a of relagunship: CONSTRUCTIONI 'Encourage more responsive and decentralised housing management anc maintenance. andThe Tory recession he:: promote tenant participation and democracy. including housing cooperatives: has gone bankrupt. Ne I; End all residential and other qualifications, which unfairly exclude people from councilexpansion will help the housing in the area where they live. extend the ‘priority’ groups under the Housing t Homelessindustry. as described cc
Persons) Act and strengthen the rights of homeless people: workload. We will also I
End enforced council house sales. empower public landlords to repurchase hemes sold underthe agreement of the tr:
the Tories on first resale and provide that future voluntary agreed sales will be at market value. We also believe thas I
Home ownershipoperative enterprise -:
Labour believes in real home ownership at prices people can afford. Under the Tories theestablish a new. public: I
Cmortgate rate reached its highest ever level at l5 per cent and is still at lO per cent. They haveand medium-sized cons.’ I
/done little to help low income groups become owners. the building materials 7 I
We support financial assistance for owner-occupation and will maintain mortgage tax reliet formonopoly conditionsI existing house purchasers at the current rate. The unfairness of mortgage tax relief above theWe will also give ger I basic rate, which gives most benefit to the highest incomes. will be phased out. We will alsoespecially atthe “jobbing I examine the possibility of a new and substantial form of financial help for first time buyers. withdirect labour organisatsc” special consideration for council and new town tenants, aimed at easing the heavy tnitial burdenswork in their locality. x: of house purchase. will oppose the contrac:
‘Labour will act to help home-owners, We will:: Simplify and reduce the cast of house purchase. ending the solicitors’ conveyancing monopoly.
and require full disclosure of mortgage lending terms and practices:°PLANNING FOR PEOPL; Make it easier for lower income groups to burrow funds on secure terms by greatly expandingThe way we plan tor the I dcouncil mortgage lending and providing the funds needed. This will be financed primarily byour housing, the kind 27 - iontending from the building societies. at least lO per cent of whose funds should be made availableare sited. We are detery: in this wav: ordinary people over the; Allow and encourage councils to provide a unified house-purchase service. including estateThe Tories have alw;:
‘agency. surveying. conveyancing and mortgage lending: people. Labour will char.
4End the leasehold system for houses, strengthen the rights of leaseholders of flats and increasepositive use of land in ch
5protection to mobile home residents. And we shall take exphc:
Privately rented housingplanning of local authors ev issue in planning
The worst housing conditions are in privately rented housing. The Tories have loosened thestop land speculation and controls on rents and security of tenure and pushed up rents. If they get the chance. they wouldnew land authorities. sim abolish all controls.; funds needed to acquire -
Labour will ensure that tenants are fully protected. We will: be fulfilled. Our proposa:
Actively encourage the transfer of all property owned by absentee private tandtords to thesafeguarded.
C)public or owner-occupied sectors. with local authorities setting the pace. This will not apply toWe intend also to wide:
owner-occupiers letting all or part of their home.; Codifving and ever
Repeal the Tories’ shorthold scheme and close other loopholes in security of tenure: anddecisions: t strengthen tenants’ nights on deposits and harassment. Improving access to 7 I
Strengthen councils’ powers to enforce repairs and improvements and the standards ofEnsuring that. befe: I management. particularly in multi-occupied properties; and launch a programme of action againstenvironmental effects are I property held empty without justification.: Creating a new func -
Bring forward measures to strengthen tied tenants’ rights and improve their access to secureto decide who should be + I housing when they leave their job. i
Bring service charges for private tenants and leaseholders within the fair rents scheme. The inner citiesI
Help for all tenantsThe decay, squalor and te.
Tenants in both the public and private sectors are plagued with difficulties caused by all-toois determined to act frequent failure of landlords to carry out repairs satisfactorily and speedily. Tenants recognisemore jobs. We wi act ow that major structural repairs, for example to blocks of flats or maisonettes, can only be dealt withpeople fiving in the pearl by large-scale improvement projects. But they rightly see no reason why routine repairs shouldthere is proper nee %:
be neglected. Labour will launch a new initiative aimed at tackling this troublesome problem. In addition ‘f aenet its
We will introduce a cight to repair for all tenants - council, new town, housing associations_ Use agreed developm private - to locale tnvestr.
II: II
LABOUR MANIFESTOi IJi: and private landlord. This will give tenants the right to force landlords. including councils.
amber o council homes for rentroutine repairs donc, with landlords footing the cost. Where there are coureil aineet ‘labecr:
whine rae as pane te copeorganisations, these will be responsible for doing this work. Major structural work will not be es “*-iincluded. but the Labour government will assist councils to carry out such work through much freeze on rents for a full vear‘larger capital investment allocations and reinstatement of an adequate housing subsidy svstem. I:
year. iWe also intend to reform the system of housing benefits for low income groups. A new Housing:: Tribunal will be established to replace the present confusing jumble of courts. tribunals and; or replace run-down estates.! committees. as an accessible means of resolving landlord-tenant disputes.
is have been revealed. i ents, access to files. exchanges.
‘son breakdown of relationship:: CONSTRUCTION sgement and maintenance. andThe Tory recession has seriously damaged the construction industry. Company after company ooperauves, has gone bankrupt. Nearly 4OO. OOO construction workers are on the dole. Labour's plan fori exclude people from councilexpansion will help the industry back to its fect But we will also introduce changes lO theI under the Housing (Homeless, industry. as described in Labour's Programme, l982 - not least to heip stabilise the industry's workload. We will also provide greater job security for emplovees: and we will work out. with repurchase homes sold underthe agreement of the trade unions. a system of decasualisation. I dsales will be at market value. We also believe that a ma‘or new role should be played in the industry by public and coI
Operative enterprise - to provide a new source of enterprise. initiative and innovation. We will at) Under the Tories theestablish a new. publicly-owned company. as @ major pace-making pubhe enterprise. for largei stihed lO per cent. They haveand medium-sized construction projects. In additon. to help protect the public ownership into:. the building materials industry. in which a small number of large companies now enjoy nearI vaintain mortgage tax relief formonopoly conditions. ahe devoo,_ mortgage tax relief above theWe will also give generous and active support to the development of workers’ cooperatives.
t be phased out. We will alsoespecially at the ‘jobbing end of the industry. We will reverse Tory policies towards local authonty help for first time buyers. withdirect labour organisations. We will give them more scope by allowing them to compete for other casing the heavy initial burdenswork in their locality. while ensuring that they are efficiently run as municipal enterprises. We
~°will oppose the contracting out of government services to privately-owned companies.
lors conveyancing monopoly.
“s: PLANNING FOR PEOPLE;; ure terms by greatly expandingThe way we plan for the use of our land affects every one of us. It determines where we build will be financed primarily byour housing. the kind of shopping centres which are available. and where new jobs and factories funds should be made availableare sited. We are determined to strengthen local planning and ensure greater participauon by ordinary people over the decisions which affect their lives.' chase service. including estateThe Tones have always put the interests of property developers before the needs of loce!
people. Labour will change this. We will ensure that local authorities are able to decide on the; asecholders of flats and increasepositive use of land in their areas instead of having to respond to the mitiatives of developers. i
And we shall take explicit powers to link Jand-use planning firmly with the economic and sociali planning of local authorities.
A kes issue in planning at local level is the ownership and use of land. We are determined lOI
“he Tories have loosened thestop land speculation and make sensible and comprehensive planning possible. We will establish ey get the chance. they wouldnew land authorities. similar to the successful Land Authority of Wales. with the powers and funds needed to acquire development land - at its current use value - so that local plans cani be fulfilled. Our proposals do not apply to owner-occupiers. whose homes and gardens will beI en(_ private landiords to thesafeguarded.
¢ pace. This will not apply toWe intend also to widen democratic participation in the planning system by:
Codifying and extending public rights of consultation, and of appeal against planning
‘ies in security of tenure: anddecisions:
Improving access to public planning inquiries and broadening their terms of reference:
zments and the standards ofEnsuring that. before the inguiry stage of certain major development proposals. the a programme of action againstenvironmental effects are subject to detailed analysis and the report is published:
Creating 4 new fund to help opjectors at major public inquiries. with an independent boar improve their access to secureto decide who should be helped and by how much. I un the fair rents scheme. The inner citiesI
The decay. squalor and level of unempioy ment in Our Inner cries are 3 nauens! disgrace. Labour aumen: anced 7is Getermined to reverse their Gechny We will provide More resources. More IMVestMen’ ane iN Tenants me all lOOmory iebs. We will act ic ensure. inrough the policies set out in this Campaign document. thatI speecils Ter vibe dealt withpeople living in the inner cities have ares to decent homes. health and education - and that
‘he:; ere is...
Oe ooh sme bienIn addition lO providing a major increase of funds for the Urban Programme. we will:;: w town. housing associationsUse agreed development plans. negouated at national level with major firms - public an private - to locate investment and jobs in the inner cities.
32lBo 69LABOUR MANIFESTO aUse regional development agencies to prepare sites. encourage municipal and cooperativestandards. Labour. enterprise. and help tmprove transport and other facilities. transport must be
‘Get local authorities to prepare local economic and social plans. We will also support thetransport sysiem. I; development of well-financed local enterprise boards in areas which need them - and enableWe will maintai:: local authorities to conclude agreed development plans with small and medium-sized local firms. and replace wern-: by extending gran: I
THE ENVIRONMENTdepots. I
Labour believes that the countryside should be preserved and enhanced as a source of recreationwey lornies w: \ jfor town and country dwellers alike and as a habitat for wild creatures and plants. Evervone hasve will cut no a
_a right to a decent living and working environment., feet ane SS I
3We intend to moniter closely - and publicly - the aation’s aregroess no moreving the satired-“e Te SOGHSP OS 7
3ment. We shall therefore present to parliament each bear a Tae rh report on the State af the4 _enour melign es
_Environment’. We wil ab saleguard our heritage bv: share of the road
7Supporting rights of access to common land. We will stop landed interests from preventingFreight Company t qAccess tor anglers:. We wall ensure l:
qStrenethening the planning laws to ensure that the countevside ts protected from damagingareas where mere i; qdevelopment. nda 2 aauonw ice. he: \ aStrengthening the legislation which protects endangered species: he network Of Dus
Providing increased resources so that the Nature Conservancy Council and Countrysideever of SETViee mn er: Commission can function effectively:‘oft Encourage the - I
Enacting 4 new Wildlife and Countryside Act and providing proper protection for sites ofOF traine congesuon. I special scientific interests. auth eee, faciliti
We will also act to curb pollution. We will: Gwe a high pric aaProceed with the implementation of the l974 Control of Pollution Act. Establish a natic I
Undertake a comprehensive review of the effectiveness of the present machinery and powersprotect our shipping I
5. on pollution control. vestini +. I
7Eliminate lead in petrol by setting a date after which all new cars will be required to use- ein inland I; only lead-free petrol. The interests of motorists will be safeguarded. Establish a new *
_Restore these environmental agencies abolished by the Tories with a responsibility fora new overall strateg:
4monitoring ait and notse pollution. Create a Nations
Develop a programme for eliminating toxic substances from our living and workingintegration and facili: gavironments.
We will reform the water industry by repealing the Tories’ Water Act and restoring democraticLAW. ORDER ANDO.
7accountability in the industry, We will reestablish a national authority charged with responsibilityLabour's aim is to en; for the strategic planning and use of all water resources. The canal system will be brought underfree from the fear the
‘a few national authority. so that it can be developed and maintained as an essential waterthe community. have! resource. We will also consider how best to provide help, for those on low incomes. with pavingas much in the intere; their water rates. accountable and fully - qare encouraged to retu
RURAL AREASthe best way of prever aTory policies have seriously harmed the rural areas. Bus services have disappeared. Rail linkswe arene ee ee; are under threat. Jubs have been axed. Houses are not being built. Village halls and sub-postom to create elect ed.
loffices have been closed. Labour will act to improve the quality of life in the rural areas; and weresponsibility for th ose; have outlined our plans in Labour's Programme l982 and in our statement Out of Town, Out ofMau nch a maior ir: Mind. We will give greater priority to rural problems. And ministers will be expected to bringCriminal Injuries Com about greatet coordination in promoting our policies. We will: Give ne otitw to er:; Ensure that the Development Commission, and its counterparts in Scotland and Wales. Brin about hetter become actively involved in implementing our policies for rural regeneration. olice.
{Take measures to increase employment by encouraging the expansion of light industry andpe "Re lace the presen’ I tourism in the rural areas. while safeguarding the rural nature of the countryside. local coonmaniti ms ‘with
{mprove the rural public transport network by a major injection of public funds and a betterCreate community \ use of existing resources. police and the communi
Wherever possible retain village schools and generally improve educational provision for allIntro dis ce strict lim:: age groups: and mobile ‘all purpose’ community services offices. the power of arrest. and
Take extensive measures to expand the provision of all tvpes of housing in the rural areas. Protect the rights of which will also help to deal with the “Second Home’ problem. those under arrest or int:
prosecutor away from th:; TRANSPORTFiscal model.: Four years of Tory government has meant serious damage (o Britain's transport system. ProfitableRepeal the Police ar elements have been sold off. Important but unprofitable sections left in public hands are beingof individuals., starved of investment. The quality of public transport service has fallen disastrously. Disband the London
Another Tory government would mean even poorer services. higher fares and lower safetydeployed in aggressive pu
IIILABOUR MANIFESTO:
Tage municipal and cooperative{standards. Labour repudiates this whole approach. We believe that the improvement of public; jtransport must be a major social priority, which can only be achieved by a sensibly integrated plans. We will also support the: transport system. We descrihe our proposals in Labour's Programme l982., ahich need them - and enableWe will maintain and improve the rail network. invest in the electrification of the main linesI
At and medium-sized local firms.: and replace worn-out railway stock. We will encourage the use of the railways for freight traffic by extending grants for rail freight facilities and encouraging the development of trans-shipment: depots. Lo nanced as a source of recreationHeavy lorries will he made to bear their full share of raad costs. including environment costs.
atures and plants. Evervone hasWe will cut to a minimum noise and pollution from goods vehicles and introduce National: routeings and restrictions to take lorries away from people. Vehicle Excise Duty for private cars igress in improving the environ-will be abolished anc the revenue secured by a higher tax on petrol.; I
‘Or report on the “State of theLabour believes that. together with a properly enforced licensing system. a publicly-ownedI, share of the road haulage industry is essential. It would clearly be sensible for the National}. nded interests from preventingFreight Company to form part of this sector: and we are examining how best to bring this about.
We will ensure that local authorities are able lO give proper support to public transport. InI de is protected from damagingareas where more fesourable concessionary travel on local transport does nat exist. we shall bring in a nationwide. off-peak half-fares scheme for pensioners. A proper licensing system. to safeguardi ties: the network of bus services. will be reintroduced We shall also ensure that a basic minimumI ancy. Council and Countrvsidelevel of service is provided throughout the country. In addition. we will:
C)-Encourage the development of effective traffic management schemes to alleviate the problemsI.-of traffic congestion. I
2 Proper protection for sites ofImprove facilities and safety standards for cyclists and increase financial incentives to local authorities to assist these improvements. I
Give a high priority to building bypasses. i muon Act. Establish a nauonal shipping organisation able to acquire and operate shipping services: and present machinery and powersprotect our shipping and jobs from unfair foreign competition... Invest in inland waterways. and encourage the greater use of them - and of coastal shipping
“w cars will be required to use-- in the interests of taking freight off our roads. I ed.. oo. Establish a new National Ports Authority to take ports into public ownership and to developI aries with a responsibility fora new overall strategy for these.
_.; Create a National Transport Authority to develop transport policy and good practice. secure
‘rom our living and workingintegration and facilitate comprehensive planning.
- Act and restoring democraticLAW, ORDER AND JUSTICEI
Tity Charged with responsibilityLabour's aim is to ensure that all sections of the community are safe on the street and at home. I
+ aystem will be brought underfree trom the fear that crime generates. We believe that the police should have the support o intained as an essenual waterthe community. have their rights safeguarded. and be fairly paid. But we also believe thai it isI ss on low incomes. with pavingas much in the interests of the police. as of their local communities, that they are properisI accountable and fully subject to the law. We will ensure that. throughout the country. the police are encouraged to return to the beat and therefore closer to the communities they serve. That is the best way of preventing and detecting crime.: I
« have disappeared. Rail linksWe intend to protect the rights of individual suspects. while providing the police with sufficient uilt. Village halls and sub-postpowers to do their job effectively whilst not infringing the civil rights of individual suspects. WeI
‘ life in the rural areas: and weaim to create elected police authorities in all parts of the country. including London. with statuton te Jent Out of Town. Out ofresponsibility for the determination of police policy within their areas. We will also. I en be expected to bring_ Launch a Major initiative to help victims. including extending and simplifying the present
*Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme.. F.. Give priority to crime prevention as part of our action programme for rundown estates. I eecraion and Wates. i Bring about be: ter coordination in the technical. support and information services of the peansion or gen industry andReplace the present police complaints procedure with an independent system accountable lO wn of public funds and a henterlocal communities. with minority police representation.
a, Creaie community police councils to provide an opportunity for open discussion betweenI
-e educational provision for allpolice and the community as to the quality and manner of police provision. i: Introduce siric: iimits on searches of people in the street. searches of premises. the use of
¢athe power of arrest. and on the time < prisoner can be held in custody before being charged. I
Of housing in the rural areas. Protect the ngrt- of those in police custody. by giving revised Judges Rules. which safeguarc those under arres: or interrogation. the force of law and. in Engisnd and Wales. take the role oc
Prosecutor aWat irom the Pouce DV impiemenungy o publi, proseculor system. on the Procurgie:
Fiscal model.
n's transport system. ProfitableRepeal the Police and Criminal Evidence Bill. because it infringed the rights and freedoms left in public hands are beingof individuals.: allen disastrously. Disband the London Special Patrol Groups and local SPGs. which have increasingly been higher fares and lower safetydeploved in aggressive public order roles., ILABOUR MANIFESTOI
Access to legal servicesagainst the refusal of an applic: I
We will not allow people's legal rights to go by default. Accessible legal services are essential tocitizenship will no longer be an protect human rights. As deseribed in Labour's Programme l982. we will increase centralUnder our new [mmuizration government spending to set up new law centres and help existing ones. and to improve the legalertteria for elderly parents and I aud scheme by widening its provisions. We will also introduce a system of appeals against theresources necessary for all appii I refusal of legal aid in criminal cases. including xrays. only for medic
We will speed the extension of duty solicitor schemes to ail magistrate courts and police stations; in the husbands and dances’ ry I in England and Wales. We will also introduce measures to heip citizens to secure chin egal rightsfg 2 Soman settied Rere irre in the areus of tribunal and welfare mghts lawensere inal immigration offici:
We aul coordinate the responsitiity for advice and legal services so that ministerial responsi-4l8O:
hility is clearer and more direct. We will aiso establish a new Legal Services Commission to beConsult Commonwealth g responsible for the provision and financing of public legal services. Our aim is to ensure that thenationals from independent cou expertise and training of the legal profession should be geared far more than at present to thoseProvide a right of appeal f legal problems affecting ordinary people. On security grounds
The penal systemEstablish 4 more independ: I
No one concerned for human dignity and civil rights can find our prison system acceptable. We are determined to improve conditions. We do not accept that wives and children should beA WIDER DEMOCRACYI
Punished together with the prisoners. We will: Labour will take action to enha
Reduce the prison population by cutting many maximum sentence lengths for non-violentability in the institutions of gov I
C)offenders. We will stop putting petty offenders into prison. We will expand non-custodial alterna-l982. We shall: I tives, and examine new penalties involving reparation and restitution to the victim. We will alsoIntroduce a Freedom of Inf I introduce a maximum period of custody for those on remand. along the lines of the provisionsand placing the onus on the aut in Scotland. Bring in data protection fe
Treat prisoners as human beings by providing reasonable conditions in our prisons. We willpersonal files: and. subject to cer incorporate. in new. legally enforceable prison rules. minimum standards on such matters as cellReform the administration space. And we will reduce unnecessary restricuons - for example on prisoners’ correspondence. modern needs and is properly 2 I
Refurbish urban prisons. done to the morale and efficien:
Hand over all specialist services in prisons. such as medical care. to the normal communitythis damage. together with the I agencies.. work of the service.
Establish a genuinely independent complaints and disciplinary procedure to replace theTake ienan to apedish the current board of visitors system. and provide detter aftercare for those leaving prison. to helpinterim measure, introduce a Bu them resettle in the community.- with the exception of those +
Improve the training. working conditions and job opportunities of prison officers. Make improvements in the
Examine the additional problems faced bv women prisoners. especially those with youngReform the procedures for children. genuinely representative of the
Overhaul the outdated hon
EQUAL RIGHTS; Give a new priority to mak; oeooo; yyooof those who use them. Wheres
The next Labour government will lead a political offensive against racial disadvantage. discrimina-; e;. ean: baas possible to those who use ther tion and harassment: and we have set out our proposals in Lahour's Programme l982. To- with clear rights for users - encourage equality and reduce discrimination. we will greatly expand funding to ethnic minoritythe public.
projects. We Avill also encourage local authorities. in selecting projects under the UrbanP-;
Programme. to provide for greater ethnic minority participation. We will also: Labour believes that state aid
Stimulate a wide range of positive action programmes to ensure that ethnic minorities receiveparliamentary democracy. We u a fair deal - in employment, education. housing and social services: and encourage the keepingReport. with the funds available
©)of ethnic records. in order to assess the needs of ethnic minorities and take steps to mect them. The security services
Lauach a major public education initiative aimed at climunating prejudice.: There is now widespread concer?
Strengthen the existing Race Relations Act - in particular. to enable us to deal moreproperiy accountable institution:
effectively with racialist literature. speeches and marches: and to remove the exception for seamenWe outline in Labour's Prograr recruited abroad. powers and responsibilities of UF I
Appoint a senior minister to lead the offensive against racial inequality. communications. We will also ex” I
We are concerned that homosexuals are unfairly treated. We will take steps to ensure that theyof the services - which will be. I are not unfairly discriminated against - especially in employment and in the detinition of privacyAct, unauthorised surveillance:. I contained in the l967 Act - along the lines set out in Labour's Programme, l982.:
Nationality and immigrationLOCAL DEMOCRACY
Through their immigration and nationality laws. the Tories have divided families and causedLabour is determined to strength I immense suffering in the immigrant communities. We accept the need for immigration controls. central and local government anc
But we will repeal the l97l Immigration Act and the l98l British Nationality Act and replaceare cun.
them with a citizeriship law that does not discriminate against either women or black and AstanFirst. we will give local author:
Britons. economic, social and eavironmer
Under our Nationality Act. we will restore rights removed by the Tories. such as the right tofully in Labour's Programme, I:
automatic citizenship if born in Britain. The Act will enable other Commonweatth and foreignestablish local enterprise boards nationals to acquire citizenship if they qualify by objective tests. and provide a right of appealpolicies on the privatisation of to? l against the refusal of an application for citizenship. We will also ensure that the cost of acquiringI ae legal Services are essential tocitizenship will no longer be an obstacle to those whe wish to apply.:
l982, we will increase centralUnder our new Immigration Act we will liberalise the age limit criteria for children and theI
2 ones, and to improve the legalIcriteria for elderly parents and other relatives. We will simplify the procedures and commit the a system af appeals against the{resources necessary for all applications to be processed promptly. and allow medical examinations.; iincluding xrays. only for medical. not administrative purposes. The race and sex discrimination strate Courts and police stationsHin the husbands and fiances’ rules will be ended: we will restore the entitlement to admission toI uzens to secure their legal rightsjoin a woman settled here irrespective of her citizenship. birthplace or ancestry. We will alsoI.'ensure that immigration officials fully respect the human rights of thase seeking entry. We willI ices $O that ministerial responsi-also: I egal Services Commission to beConsult Commonwealth governments so as to resolve the question of the other British s. Our aim is to ensure that thenationals from independent countries who possess no other citizenship. i ' more than at present to thoseProvide a right of appeal for those who the Home Secretary proposes to deport or exclude\ on security grounds.:
Establish a more independent and balanced panel of adjudicators for immigration appeals.
r prison system acceptable. We~
Wives and children should beA WIDER DEMOCRACY
Labour will take action to enhance democratic rights and ensure greater openness and accountI n( lengths for non-violentability in the institutions of government. We have set out our policies in Labour's Programme.
i expand non-custodial alterna-l982. We shalt:\ von to the victim. We will alsoIntroduce a Freedom of Information Bill. providing for a genuine sysiem of open government
‘ong the lines of the provisiansand placing the onus on the authorities to justify withholding information.
Bring in data protection legislation to prevent the abuse of confidential information held onI aditions in our prisons. We willpersonal files: and. subject to certain exceptions. allow individuals access to their personal records. I
‘andards on such matters as cellReform the administration of government and the civil service machine so that it meets
2 OR prisoners’ correspondence. modern needs and is properly accountable to elected representatives. We recognise the damageI done to the morale and efficiency of the civil service by this government. We will work to repair care. to the normal communitythis damage. together with the unions. and to give proper recognition to the importance of the work of the service.
nary procedure to replace theTake action to abolish the undemocratic House of Lords as quickly as possible and. as anI r those leaving prison. to helpinterim measure. introduce a Bill in the first session of parliament to remove its legislative powersI
~~ with the exception of those which relate to the life of a parliament, tes af prison officers. Make improvements in the legislative process and procedures in the House of Commons.
> especially those with soungReform the procedures for appointments to public bodies to ensure they are more open and genuinely representative of the community.
Overhaul the outdated honours system.
Gwe a new priorty to making our public services more responsive to the needs and wishes
-acial disadvantage. discriminaof those who use them. Wherever possible we will decentralise services to make them as close abour'’s Programme l982. Toas possible ta those who use them We will alse provide more effecuve procedures for complaints and funding to ethnic minorit,~~ with clear rights for users and ensure better training and status for those in contact with lg projects under the Urbanthe public. I
We will also:: Labour believes that state aid for political parties is now essential for the working of our re on minorities receiveparliamentary democracy. We will introduce such aid. along the lines set out in the Houghton esencourage the keepingReport. with the funds available adjusted to today’s prices and index linked.. and take steps to meet them. The security services me Prejudice. de:. There is now widespread concern about our security services We intend thai they should become
- to enable us to deal moreproperis accountable instautions - and that the civil rights of individuals are fully protected.
move the excepuion for seamenWe outline in Labour's Programme, l982 our proposals for a new Security Act. to define the\; aiepowers and responsibilities of the services. including those concerned with the interception of:
EQUAcommunications We will also extend parhamenvary accountability - including over the accounts iahe steps lO ensure that thesof the services - which will be assisted by 2 new select committee: prohibit. under the Securini and in the definition of privacyAct. unauthorised surveillance: and abolish ‘D’ nouces.
‘rogramme, l982.\
LOCAL DEMOCRACYi aia So tamings onl causceLabour s determined to strengthen local demoacram, We will shim radically the balunce perweer.
leva fetoimmugranor comirabcentral and loca; government and give local communiues much More say about how their services a Nationainty Act and replaceare Turi.-
‘er women or black and AsianFirst. we will give local authorities freedom to impiemem comprehensive local plans. covering economic. social and environmental policies. We explain elsewhere in this document. and more ae Tones. such as the right l¢fully in Labour's Programme, l982. our proposais to assist local authorities to create jobs. to
+ Commonwealth and toreignestablish local enterprise boards and engage in jocal economic planning. We will reverse Tor and provide a right of appealpolicies on the privatisation of local authority services.
ILABOUR MANIFESTO
Second, we will expand the scope for local democracy. [astead of local councillors never beingmeantime. we will 2: I completely sure what is permitted and what ts ura vires, we shall give a power of generalBritish government. - I competence to all focal authorities to carry out whatever activites are aot expressly forbidden bysides of the border.: I statute. We shall also seek to define the relauonship retween central and local government - asto proceed with ur: I part of our consideration of the universal applicuuen of realistic minimum standards - so thatTory policies hae i: basic provision of kev services ts available in all parts of the country. We will alsa: soared The ccon >: Take action to encourage councils'to make ther services more responsive to the aeeds undtl git tena tere!
wishes of their cleats and of tne local communisall of the economic: I
Etend soraere ints ung Madsiriad Semecracy in ieeal government, av enabling noa-svoungMasstve injection ors I smolovee representalives fo Se Soupted on te comminees. and encouraging the introduction ofWe will also act on jiormal procedures for participation in decisions on the implementation of policy. We will alsowill repeal the Preven
4ailow all but the most seaior officers the mght to become elected or coopted members of theof Diplock courts. "4 authority which empiovs them. make progress towars: Pay proper allowances and provide adeuuate administrative support. to local councilors..
We are examining how est to reform local government. We believe that services such as health.
4water and sewerage should become answerable to a much greater extent to elected members: LEISURE FOR LIVIN¢ ind we aim tw end, if we can. the present contusing division uf services between two tiers ofLabour believes that 4. authority. Unitary district authorities. in England and Wales. could be responsible for all of theservices and facilities / functions tn this area that they could sensibly undertake, We wul also ensure that the City ofThe artsI
London is absorbed into a reformed democratic system of local government, For Scotland. anyA crucial part will be >.
()reform of local government will be a matter far our proposed Scottish Assembly. sense. an accepted par:
Local government financeon their availability to
Labour will reverse the Tory government's attacks on focal authority services. We shall providede provided. with pric finance. through the rate support grant. to allow local suthority expenditure fo grow in line withLocal authorities wiil A.
aur plans for economic expansion: and the hard-pressed urban areas will benetit especially fromand the arts will be zer an increased share of the resources available. We will retain a Min: Labour believes in active local democracy. We will therefore repeal the Tory legisiauon whichthe disparities im pros; iallows the government to impose ceilings on focal authority spending. and to impose penaltiesbodies which supper: “7: on focal authorities Whose spending cxceeds those collinus. We shall repeal the ban on supplemen-representation trom #2:: tary tates. We will restore che right of focal authorities fo spend additional amounts from revenuebe strengthened, and re:
on capital expenditure in excess of loan sanction limits. The rate support grant system ‘aull beCouncil.: recast to give fairer treatment to areas in greatest need and the maximum freedom of acuon forFor the film industry.
‘local authorities to control their own budgets. Film Finance Corporatio
Labour will also enact legislation to abolish the penalty of personal surcharge on individualfilm-makers who produc councillors. [Instead counciflors. like others in the community. wil be liable at law for any unlawfulmaking and distribution or tilegal acts. Public audit will be confined to that purpese and auditors will not be permitted tocompany monopoly of l:
involve themselves in sudgements on politics or policies. be responsible for exten.
Sport and recreation
DEVOLUTION TO SCOTLANDLabour will accept respo:
Labour is determined to decentralise power in decision-making. In Scotland. the people haveEncourage greater p shown their support for devolution in a referendum and at successive general elections: and weGive incentives to s have set out our proposals for devolution in a mayor statement. Scotland and Devolution, Laboursporting and communiiy wilt: Encourage local auth
Establish a directly etected Scottish Assembly. with an execuuve drawn from members ofto public use.
{ ©)the assembly. Set up an immediats
Provide the Assembly with legislative and executive powers over a wide range of domesticReview the provisicr policy. including matters such as health. education and soctal welfare. distribution.
Ensure a major role for the Assembly in assisting in the regeneration of Scottish industry -Ensure that the spor inctuding the preparation and implementation of a Plan for Scotland - within the context of ourbring sporting success to f overall national plan. We will also provide for
As well as receiving grants from central government, the Scottish Assembly will have tax-ratsingangting and other waterb.: I powers. thus ensuring that the level of services provided can be determined in Scotland. access to rivers and fakes. I improvements in respect o I
NORTHERN IRELANDThe mediaI
Labour believes that Ireland should. by peaceful means and on the basis of consent, be united. Our aims in the media are and recognises that this will be achieved with the introduction of socialist policies. We respect‘greater accountatlity. For and support, however, the night of the Northern frelind people to remain within the UK, althoughthat individuals can set the I this does not mean that Unionist leaders can have a veto on political development: and we acceptfurther concentration in th:
that, to achieve agreement and consent between the two parts of Ireland. we must create greaterFor the press. we will en unity within the Northern freland community. Setting up a launch tur
In our l98l conference statement and in Labour's Programme l982, we set out ia full Labour'sEnsuring that all major policy on Northern Ireland. We will aim to establish an agreed, devatved administration. la thesupply and display. subject iMere! cae oe peter a a ih acre Fo ES ope ne its andes ii ete eet ne ot Baia itis toi maeimnalt *A ta a i at asl itl Ch -s
LABOUR MANIFESTOI. l of local councillors never beingmeanume, we will continue with direct rule. We will alse initiate early discussions between the shall give a power of generalBritish government. the Irish government. the Irish Labour Party. and the trade unions on both
~ are not expressly forbidden by! sides of the border. and political representatives of the peaple of Northern Iretand. on how best tral and local government - as{to proceed with our policy of unification by consent.:
minimum standards - so thatiTory policies have been a disaster for the Northern Ireland economy. Unemployment has ury. We will also: isoared The economy is in ruins. Housing and the social services are in desperate straits. Labour
‘re fesponsive ta the needs and ss}will give new hope to Northern Ireland. We will create jobs and provide investment. We will use; all of the economic planning powers and institutions set out in this document - together with a rment. by enabling non-votingmassive injection of public resources - to rebuild the economy.
“‘Acouraging the introduction ofWe will also act on security and civil rights. along the lines set out in our l98l statement. We atation of policy. We will alsowill repeal the Prevention of Terrorism Act and the Payment of Debt Act and reform the svstem
J or coopted members of theof Diplock courts. We will provide equal rights for women. including rights te abortion. and make progress towards an integrated comprehensive system of education.
upport, to local councillors.
ve that services such as health, er extent to elected members: LEISURE FOR LIVING
“ services between two tiers ofLabour believes that a comprehensive approach is needed. at national and local levels. lO provide
Id he responsible for all of theservices and facilites for letsure.
cen ent. Fe colland. anyA crucial part will be plaved in this by the arts. Labour's aim is te make the arts. in their broadest
°~. sense. an accepted part of everyday life for the whole population. We will place special emphasis on their availability to the voung. the handicapped and the retired. Substantial extra funds will
‘tity services. We shall providebe provided. with priority being given to the regions and to access for those on low incomes.
\penditure to grow in line withLocal authorittes will have a statutory duty to provide adequate arts and entertainments facilities:
eas will benefit especially fromand the arts will be zero-rated in respect of VAT.
We will retain a Minister of the Arts. whose first task will be to undertake a major survey on peal the Tory legislation whichthe disparities in provision between regions and to produce proposals for action. The public iding. and to impose penaltiesbodies which support the arts will also be made more open and accountable, and inciude more il repeal the ban on supplemen-representation from warkers in the arts. local authorities and consumers The Craft Council will
‘ditional amounts from revenuebe strengthened. and regional museums and galleries supported through a Museums and Gulleries
¢ support grant system will beCouncil.
jaximum freedom of action forFor the film industry. we will establish a British Film Authority. responsible for the National
Film Finance Corporation. This will ensure that revenue from a levy on ticket sales goes to BritishI rsonal surcharge on individualfilm-makers who produce British films We will also ensure that the profits from British filmse diable at law for any untewie! muking and distribunon are channelled back inte British films - anc that the present two.
aditors wil) not be permitted tocompany monopoly of film distribution in Britain is ended. The new Brith Fiim Authority will be responsible tor exiending public ownership into film distrinution
Sport and recreation
Labour will accept responsibility for the provision of a broadiv-based leisure service. We will:
In Scotland. the people haveEncourage greater participation in sport and recreation. i ssive general elections: and weGive incentives to voluntary bodies to involve themselves more widely in the provision of atland and Devolution. Laboursporting and community facilities. I
Encourage local authorities and other owners of facilities to make them much more availableI ui frawn from members ofla public use. I
Set up an immediate enquiry into the financial basis of sport and recreation. I over a wide range of domesticReview the provision of national sporting facilities. sa as to secure a fairer geographicali faredistribution.
aeration af Scotush industry -Ensure that the sporting talent of the nation receives sufficient support to enable them tc nd within the context of ourbring sporting success to Britain.
We will alse provide for the wider use of the countryside for recreations! purposes. such as
Assembly will have tax-raisingangling and other water-based sports. Angling will be given additional support. by ensuring widerI stermined in Scatand: access lO rivers and lakes. financial assistance to provide a wider ownership of fishing waters.
improvements in respect of conservation. and action to prevent pollution.
The media
Sy Paste of cOmsent. no umted, Our sims in the medie are to sulvguard freedom of expression. encourage Giversity and establish sosiadst mobos We respectSteater accountamiits For all the medio. we will miroduce a statutory ment ot rephe te ensur stain with the OR. althoughthal individuals can set the reeerd straigh:. We will introduce stronger messures te prevent am ai development: and we acceptfurther concentration in the media.
ireland. we must create greaterFor the press. we will encourage diversity bv:
Setting up a launch fund to assist new publications.
WSD. we set out in full Labour'sEnsuring that all major wholesalers accept any lawful publication. and arrange for its proper jevolved administranon. In thesupply and displav. subject to a handling charge.
3O7oyNSLABOUR MANIFESTO
Preventing acquisition of further newspapers by large press chains. seek agreement uw:
7Protecting freedom of expression bv prohibiting joint control af the press. commercial radiocommon strategy ne and television. ES
Breaking up major concentrations of press ownership, by setting an upper limit for theThe process of wi number of majof publications in the hands of a single proprieter of press groupOn taking office lReplacing the Press Council with a stronger. more representative Dody. Festartish a umetab::{n broadcasting. we will aim to make both broadcasting wwelf. and the organisations responsible. White Paper. In a.
more accountable and representative - and to provide greater public access. Our aim is toRepeal Bill: first. ir: promote a more wide-ranging and genuine pluralism in Che mecia, and we ses out cur pr itesaisae _ “mans a
3in Lubeur’s Programme l982. We will also seek to introduce a get uinely incependett adcudicatien* oa Re Beg eat.. Moanesances and complaints. The ‘icence tee adi te phases cut ter pemsiecners. during ine_foeewing Re PI vetime of the Lureur government"Grawal Later. she:. The high standards of British public service broadcasting are threatened hv Tory plans tothe iy" Act and _
4introduce cable TV on free-market principles. We wll regulate satellite and cable provision andthe Community: Br
§foster the same principles of diversity and pluralism as conventional oroadcasting authorities ToEuropean Fariame: \ avoid wasteful duplication. we will entrust the provision of the national cate Asiem to Briush,. There il feed I; Telecom., iN any New agreeme: I necessary changes I
Animal protection‘the status YuO as ree I qThe Labour Party was the first major political party to publish « policy statement. in l978, oncourse. extend beyor animal protection - Living Without Crueltv, and these policies are reaffirmed in Labour's
Progrummne l982, We believe that all animals - whether in the wild, domesticated or farmed ~THE INTERNATION; should be properly treated. The Labour Party is
)To achieve our aims we will transform the Farm Animal Welfare Council into a Standing Rovalachiese this we must weCommission on Animal Protection. We will also urgently review the l876 Cruelty to Animalsbetween nations. anc
Act. A high priority will be given to research into alternatives to using live animals in experiments. to survive. Our fore:.
and to restrictions on the use of five animals in experiments - with proper control and supervision, A deep crisis Row qin order fo avoid pain. lengthening dole quc
Hare coursing. fox hunting and ail forms of hunting with dogs sill be made illegal. This will\recession has added not, however, affect shooting and fishing. The use of snares will also be made illegal. believes that there is 'We will lay down clear conditions on freedom of movement for livestock: and we will ensure thatquo so manifestly ti our legislation meets. at least, the requirements of the European Convention for the Protection ofinternanonal suppor:
Animals kept for Farming Purposes. We will also han. over a phased period. all extreme livestockshall work inside the sustems and introduce legislation to ensure that animals are slaughtered as near as possible tostability of so many <:
the pomt of production. We will ban the export of live food animals. enduring economic cr
Animals kept in zoos. circuses and safari parks will be included in our animals protection; Labour recognises I legislation. Health and safety at work legislation will be reviewed in order to better protect peoplepeoples of the world.
employed on such premises. urge the American go 'and devote ail our etfsome of the resource:
BRITAIN AND THE COMMON MARKETsecurity and human de
Geography and history determine that Britain is part of Europe. and Labour wants to see EuropeAn essential differer safe and prosperous. But the European Economic Community. which does not even include thepolicy that will help ir whole of Western Europe. was never devised to suit us, and our experience as a member of itto find ways in which -. has made it more difficult for us to deat with our economic and industrial problems. {t hasBritain can play in thi:: sometimes weakened our ability to achieve the objectives of Labour's international policy.. Our objectives canr:: The next Labour government, committed to radical. socialist policies for reviving the Britishfriendly governments.
economy. is bound to tind continued membership a most serious obstacle to the fulfilment ofconvert these objectis:
@those policies. In particular the rules of the Treaty of Rome are bound to conflict with our strategy, for economic growth and full employment. our proposals on indusinal policy and for increasingDISARMAMENT -- Tr.
ltrade. and our need to restore exchange controls and to regulare direct overseas investment. The pursuit of peace. de: Moreover, by preventing us from buying food from the best sources of world supply. they wouldthe process of detente.
run counter to our plans to controt prices and inflation. East and West. A third
For all these reasons. British withdrawal from the Community is the right policy for Bntain -grows alarmingly.
to he completed well within the lifetime of the parliament. That is our commitment. But we areLabour is determinec also committed to bring about withdrawal in an amicable and orderly way. so that we do not'l983, in what is a critics prejudice employment or the prospect of increased political and economic cooperation with thethe imperative case for whole of Europe. by exampte and by com:; We emphasise that our decision to bring about withdrawal in no sense represents any weakeningsecure multilateral selut ot our commitment to internationalism and international cooperation. We are not ‘withdrawinggo hand in hand if eithe from Europe’. We are seeking to extricate ourselves from the Treaty of Rome and otherdisrupt our existing aflia
Community treaties which place political burdens on Britain, Indeed. we believe our withdrawalnuclear defence policy.
will allow us to pursue a more dynamic and positive international policy - one which recognisesTo achieve our parac the true political and geographical spread of international problems and interests. We will alsoraces pursued beneath its
-. ILABOUR MANIFESTO qhains:. seck agreement with other European governments - both in the EEC and outside - on a of the press. commercial radiocommon strategy for ecanomic expansion.
setting an upper limit for theThe process of withdrawal " OF press group. On taking office we will open preliminary negotiations with the other EEC member states to lative body. establish a timetable for withdrawal: and we will publish the results of these Negotiations in a; 'd the organisations responsible.)White Paper. In addition. as soon as possible after the House assembles. we will introduce a l public access. Our aim is toRepeal Bill: first. in order to amend the l972 European Communities Act. ending the powers of a. and we set out our proposals; the Community in the UK: and second. to provide the necessary powers to repeal the l972 Act.
ainely independent adjudicationwhen the negotiations on withdrawal are completed.; out for pensioners. during theFollowing the publication of the White Paper, we will begin the main negotiations on withdrawal. Later. when appropriate and in the same parliament. we will use our powers to repeal
2 threatened by Tory plans tothe l972 Act and abrogate the Treaty of Accession - thus breaking all of our formal links with stellite and cable provision andthe Community. Britain will at this point withdraw from the Council of Ministers and from the nal broadcasting authorities. ToEuropean Parliament., a:_.; I national cable system to British There will need te be a period of transition. to ensure a minimum of disruption - and to phase. in any new agreements we might make with the Community. This will enable us to make al! the necessary chunges in our domestic legislation. Until these changes in UK law have taken place.
the status quo as regards particular items o} EEC legislation will remain. And this penod will. of
4 l) statement. in l978. on'course. extend bevond the date when we cease. formally. to be members.
es reaffirmed in Labour's vild, domesticated or farmed -THE INTERNATIONAL DIMENSION
The Labour Party is working to create a democratic socialist society in Britain. but we realise to
2 Council into a Standing Rovalachieve this we must enjoy the fullest international cooperation. There is a real interdependence
* the l876 Cruelty to Animalsbetween nations. and. if Britain under Labour is not to stand on the sidelines. we must cooperate ing live animals in experiments. to survive. Our foreign policy is a logical extension of our work at home.
Proper control and supervision'A deep crisis now afflicts the world economy. In the developed world. recession has meant lengthening dole queues and a falling standard of life: for the peoples of the Third World.
will be made illegal. This willrecession has added to an already intolerable burden of poverty. Unlike the Tories. Labour else he made illegal.'believes that there is a way out of the crisis. and that we need not accept an international status vestock: and we will ensure thatquo so manifestly riddled with injustice. inefficiency and waste. Labour will pursue and win onvention for the Protection ofinternational support for policies designed to stimulate trade. investment. and growth: and we ed period. all extreme livestockshall work inside the appropriate institutions to end the financial chaos which now threatens the
‘ghtered as near as possible tostability of so many countries. There can be no sure prospect of peace in a world wracked by an als. enduring economic crisis. Labour's policies will help bring that crisis to an end dive in our animals protecuonLabour recognises the urgent need to restore detente and dialogue between the states and thr "order to better protect peopleFpeoples of the world. We will actively pursue dialogue with the Soviet Union and China. and wil!
urge the American government to do so. We will work consistently for peace and disarmament.
and devote all aur efforts to pulling the world back from the nuclear abyss. Labour will dedicate, some of the resources currently wasted on armaments to projects designed to promote both security and human development.
‘¢ Labour wants to see EuropeAn essential difference between the Labour and the Tory approach is that we have a foreign
~uch does nat even include thepolicy that will help liberate the peoples of the world from oppression. want and fear. We seek experience as a member of itto find ways in which social and political progress can be achieved and to identify the role that l Cysnal problems. It hasBritain can play in this process.
-ar\_aternational policy. Our objectives cannot be pursued in isolation. we will work with the international agencies.
olicies for reviving the British’friendly governments. and with socialist parties and genuine liberation movements in order to s obstacle to the fulfilment ofconvert these objectives into concrete achievements.
“Ad lO conflict with our strategy
‘inal policy and for increasingDISARMAMENT - THE INTERNATIONAL CONTEXT
* direct overseas invesiment. The pursuit of peace. development and disarmameni is central to our policy. We wish to strengthen
~ ot warld supply. they wouldthe process of detente. which means the easing of pokucal as well as military tension between.. East and West. A third world war would destroy civilisation. vet the danger of a nuclear halocaus:
ine right policy for Britain -grows alarmingly.
eur commitment. But we areLabour is determined that Britain should play its ful! part in the struggle for peace. Now in ser way. so that we de nai$983. in what is @ critical vear for peace. we can begin to influence events bs the wav we presem
ACME COOPETaUON WIth thethe imperative cusc for dbarmament In government we can carry that influence much further bv example ane fh common acnen with ciner We mus’ usc umfateral steps toner bs britain
Bay Pepieseniis any Weakeningsecure multilateral solutions on the international level Unilateralism and multilateralism musii en. We are not ‘withdrawinggo hand in hand if either is to suceed ft is for this reason that we are against moves that would
Treaty of Rome and otherdisrupt our existing alliances. but are resolved on measures to enable Britain to pursue a non-{
-d. we beheve our withdrawalnuclear defence policy.
valicy ~~ one which recognisesTo achieve our paramount aim - stopping the nuclear arms race itself. and the other arms; ns and interests. We will alsoraces pursued beneath its shadaw - we need stronger international institutions. First and foremost\ acy
_a ~LABOUR MANIFESTO is a United Nations organisation with real and growing authority, Labour is determined to sustainithat savings in militar; and fortify the United Nations. Alf our recent experience reemphasises how necessary it is to}industries. We shall gis
Fghave an international Charter against aggfession. [t is a tragedy that the l982 UN Special SessionIso that the valuabie reion Disarmament was allowed to disband in failure and disappointment. We shall work to recall‘goods.
a new session on a more ambitious and hopeful basis, We will support the commitments of the: The emphasis af our qUN Special Sessions on Disarmament and the UN Committee on Disarmament. ithat are clearly equics jWe shall seek to restore the Final Document on Disarmament. approved bv the l978 United‘geography and econem
Nations Seectal Session. as the long-term objective. But. of course. as the international tensionpresent threatened oy *: sharpens. we must pursue other more immediate aims. Labour has always opposed Soviet deplovWe are alarmed os tr meat of $$2Os. We want to see the Geneva talks on intermediate weapons succeed. Labour wasand han the surgi.: arguing that they should begin long before Presideat Reagan and View Thatner cume reund toArgentad amd Tarace; the idea [is umperatee tmat the SALT Of rgreements ranted. We snail sork tor this, WeAMgtessiem AC Bie 7 qstromgis surper the fecuwtion of strategie Weupors in tae START clas. Weel propose urgentander sirtct ministers. -; action ta muke the Non-Prouferauen Treats effective and to keep it effeetive. The ancontrotled proliferation of nuclear weapons would enormously increase the danger to us all. THE COMMONWEALT
Following the steps taken by the last Labour government in such Helds as non-proliferation and: We shall continue lO8
]the Mutual and Balanced Force Reduction talks. Britain must again take a lead in disarmamentof international orgar:-
Negotiauions.;‘Labour has aluass ate, nations. culung acress
DEFENCE POLICYpolitical and maternal <<
The overriding task for Britain. as for the rest of ihe world. is to draw buck trom the nuclear. The future prosperity abyss. Britain must act on her own account as weil as seeking agreement with other countries on: linked to the future of nuclear disarmament. manufacturing exports 2:
One immediate step our government must take is to insist on implementing the recent Unttedbalance of trade. If the::
rt )Nations call for a freeze on the production. deployment 4nd testing of nuclear weapons. snd forCountless British jobs *.
a comprehensive test ban. That the Tory government should have voted against these propositionsthe poorer countries. TTM I in the United Nations is deplorable. and betrays our counttv’s capacity to play a leading role asworking people Doth in I I: an advocate of world disarmament. Labour's proposals wul help to restore that opportunityThe war that Latour ~; Labour believes in effective defence through collective security but rejects the present emphasisA primary objective of: on nuclear weapons. Britain and her allies should have sufficient military strength to discourageNorth-South dialogue. 7: external aggression and to defend themselves should they de attacked. Labour's commitment ispoverty in the Third We
Fto establish a non-nuclear defence policy for this country. This means the reyecnon of any freshthreat to international 7:
qnuclear bases of weapons on British soil or in Brush waters. and the removal of alf existingLabour sets a high er:
4nuclear bases and weapons. thus enabling us to make 4 direct contribution to an eventually muchreach the UN sponserec: wider nuclear-free zone in Europe. However. all this cannot be done at once. and the way wea further target of lO p<: do it must be designed to assist in the task to which we are also committed -~ securing nuclearthe interests of the poore disarmament agreements with other countries and maintaining cooperation with our allies. we will fund as approer.
The most pressing objective must be to prevent the deployment here or elsewhere in Westernup once again 4 separare
Europe of Cruise or Pershing missiles. This deployment would mark a new and dangerousLabour will plan an ex; escalation in the nuclear arms cace. {t would make the achievement of effective disarmamentchanges in the internatic agreements covering these and other weapons much more difficult in the future. We will thereforethem to receive stable 7:
not permit the siting of Cruise missiles in this country and will remove any that are already intrade agreements. Labos place. the activities of British->-
The next Labour government will cancel the Trident programme. Apart from the huge. persis-Labour believes that. <7 ting and distorting burden it would impose on our defence budget and our economy as a whole. be vital to ensure that > it would not offer security but would rather help to intensify the arms race. We will propose thatFund receive adequate *-
Britain's Polaris force be included in the nuclear disarmament negotiations in which Britain musttaking into account the ¢- take part. We will. after consultation. carry through in the lifetime of the next parliament ourcondition of their peorlenon-nuclear defence policy. There is much Britain -
( )Labour believes in collective security. The next Labour government will maintain its supportamee again speak out in - for NATO. as an instrument of detente no fess than of defence. We wish to see NATO itselfWe will ensure that ore:
develop a non-nuclear strategy. We will work towards the establishment of a mew security systemprogramme for student +7 \ in Europe based on mutual trust and confidence. and knowledge of the objectives and capabilitieslevel and availability of - of all sides. The ultimate objective of a satisfactory relationship in Europe is the mutual and concurrent phasing out of both NATO and the Warsaw Pact. THE LAW OF THE SEA
We oppose any attempt to expand the role of the alliance into uther continents. We condemnreleS the rece the doctrine that nuclear war can be limited, and the notion that somehow the West must catchLabour we oe the UNCL:
up with a supposed nuclear superiority in the East. We are opposed to the introduction intofutly meres like either
Europe of any new nuclear systems such as the neutron bomb. We oppose. too, the storage. ocean USE. P the Sea. whic:
research and production of chemical and biological weapons. and call for the withdrawal of allthe Law of ihe Sea, forward stocks of chemical weapons. ensure that Britain parties ponI,
Labour will reduce the proportion of the nation’s resources devoted to defence so that the burden we bear will be brought into line with that of the other major European NATO countries. NEAR AND MIDOLE EAS without increasing the reliance on nuclear weapons. A Labour government will plan to ensureThe Labour Party is comm
33OLABOUR MANIFESTO rrhawises peermined to aanthat savings in military expenditure do not tead to unemployment for those working in defence wat the l982 UN specu A sicindusiries we shall give material furpert and encouragement to plans for industrial conversion tment. We shall work to recallIcoos the valuable resources of the defence industries can be used for the production of useful ees emmitments of theIThe emphasis of our defence priorities in the l98Os and l99s must be to create military forces
_ approved by ' he l978 Uniithat are clearly equipped and deployed for defensive purposes. and tailored more to Britain's sc. ds the international t nutedgeography and econamic resources. This will mean maintaining adequate conventional forces. at always opposed Soviet ee: present threatened by the extravagant expenditure on Trident. a weapons succeed Lab ne OyWe are alarmed by the growth of the arms trade. Labour will limit Britain s arms sales abroad
Mrs. Thatcher came round weand ban the supply of arms to repressive regimes such as South Africa. El Salvador. Chile.
l We shall work for thi, weArgentina and Turkey. We will not supply arms to countries where the chances of international talks. We willass WEaggression of internal repression would be increased. Labour will ensure that all arms sales are; We MIN Propose urgentunder strict ministerial control, subject to parliamentary accountability.
“at effective. The uncontrolled.,.
canger to us all.. fields as non-proliferation and: THE COMMONWEALTH AND THE DEVELOPING WORLD at take a lead in disarmament:: We shall continue to work for the peaceful and just settlement of disputes and the strengthening of imernauonal organisations. parucularly the Commonwcalth. as well as the United Nauien:
Labour has alwavs attached a special significance to the Commonwealth - a unique form of
OC)nations. cutting across ethnic, cultural and ideological barriers We will strengthen Britain's o draw back from the nuclearpolitical and material commiment to the Commonwealth. a ement with other countries on_ The future prosperity of Britain, as well as that of other industrialised countries. is inextricably, linked to the future of the developing world. At the moment some XI per cent of Britain’s nplementing the recent Unitedmanufacturing exports are destined for Third World countries with which we enjoy a very healthy ig of nuclear weapons. and forbalance of trade. If their economies could be stimulated. the gain would be ours as well as theirs.
oted against these propositionsCountless British jobs have already come about as a consequence of our trading relationship with racity to play a leading role asthe poorer countries. That relationship must be strengthened and expanded in the interests of
Y restore that opportunity, °working people both in Britain and overseas. oo ut rejects the present emphasisThe war that Labour will wage on poverty in Britain will be extended to the developing world.
niinary strength to discourageA primary objective of the next Labour government's foreign policy will be tc help revive the: ked. Labour's commitment isNorth-South dialogue. That some 8(k). OO(l, OOO people should be condemned to a life of absolute ans the rejection of anv freshpoverty in the Third World is an affront to anv version of civilised values. as well as a constani ad the removal of all existingthreat to international peace and stability.
“bution to an eventual, muchLabour sets a high priority on attacking the causes of mass poverty A Labour government will cone at once. and the wav wereach the UN sponsored aid target of O.7 per cent of Gross National Product and work towards ommutted - securing nucleara further target of l. O per cent. We will also reestablish the principle thal aic must be used in
‘peration with our allies. the interests of the poorest people in the poorest countrizs and. in our efforts to bring this about.
here or elsewhere in Westernwe will fund as appropriate. both governments and independent organisations. Labour will set math a new and daneerousup once again a separate Ministry of Overseas Deselopment with a cabinet mimster.
nt of effective disarmamentLabour will plan an expansion of trade with the developing world and will work to bring about.
+ the tuture. We will thereforechanges in the international trading system that will be of benefit to poor countries. allowing!
nove anv that are already inthem to receive stable prices for their commodity exports and to diversify their production. InI,, trade agreements. Labour will insist upon workers’ rights and will bring in legislation to control; l from the huge. persis-the activities of British-based multinational companies operating overscas. ae an economy as a wholeLabour believes that. in order to enhance the prospects of the Third World economies. it will ms race. We will propos e thatbe vital to ensure that organisations such as the World Bank and the International Monetaryi tuations in which Britain mustFund receive adequate funding from the world community. and provide loans in a way that.\
“yt the next parliament outaking mto account the economic difficulties faced by each developing country. will improve theI
Pent ourcondition of their peoples nent will maintain its supportThere is much Brita can do to hift peopie out of absolute poverty. and a Labour Britain wil!
We wish te see NATO itseltOnce again speak out in solidarity with the poor and the oppressed everywhere
Tent of a new security sustemWe will ensure that provision for overscas stude nin ts based on a major expansion of the ODA the ohectives and capabilitiesprogramme for student sponsorship giving preference to entrants on grounds of origin. income it Europe as the mutual andlevel and availability of courses in Britain and elsewhere.
nat Genmunenis We condemnTHE LAW OF THE SEA
Tales iia West musi catchLatour welcomes the recemthy concnided Lonned Natiems Contyrence on if Lew of the Soa ame
Mee The introguctken intofully supports the UNCLUS proposal dur c mew MigMnatona: regime CAVETINE OkETS gePe
Ve oppose. too. the storage. ocean use. Unlike either the Tors government or the Reagan administration. Labour will endorse cal tor the withdrawal of al! the Law of the Sea. which will see as a crucial element in the North-South dialogue. and will ensure that Britain participates actively in the future progress of UNCLOS.
semed ta defence so that the
7 European NATO countries. NEAR AND MIDOLE EAST
‘ernment will plan to ensureThe Labour Party is committed to the promotion of peace. demacracy and socialism in the Middle adiLABOUR MANIFESTO; East. and to the principle of national self-determination. The Arab-Israeli conflict remains aown people. Labour de!
qmajor element in the continuing conflict and tension in the region. though nat the only one. TheLatin American mainia:
4core of the conflict is the struggle hetween the (sracli and Palestinian peoples for the realisationsettlement of the probk. of national self-determination, We shall therefore:: Support the right of all Israelis to live in peace and security in the state of Israel. withinASIA jsecure internationally recognised borders.:-
4Support the right of Palestinians to self determination. including the establishment of aEmotional as well as
3Palestinian state.; was the l945 Labour y, 4eos. Labour:3 concerned; The suffering of the Cehanese people and their continued sccurathon SN teretan tories demain iswt Asia. and we will sur
7oyr attention, and we shall work tor the restoration of cRe ctogtenden. e. sovereignty uncadil end tulitars imvois
‘rermteriil mtegrity or ihe Lebanon. and play a full part ia ts reconsirucuenThe Labour Party is iThe Turkish dictatorship is of special concern te Britain. grsen Turkish membership of NATOaffected the ability of st: and tts status in Europe. We deplore the constitution imposed upon the Turkish people and will; Steps will be taken te in work for the restoration of freedom and democracy. Untul this is achieved we shall opposeLabour believes in 2 <: assistance to the Turkish junta. idirectly involved in inte:
Labour is deeply concerned by the continuing violation of human rights throughout the Middle: will hold tatks with Chi; East. Labour will do what it can to help those struggling for freedom. democracy, civtl and Uradeipeople of Hong Kong.
union rights.,; IaJapan is a major pow
We support genuine guarantees for the independence. sovereignty and territorial integrity ofIactive part in a concerte
Cyprus. and the pursuit of intercommunal discussions sponsored by the UN for as long as boththe obstacles that her tra communities are committed to those talks. idivision between North 2
)AFRICAHUMAN RIGHTS
We are totally opposed to apartheid and will unequivocally support its opponents. giving financial: Labour gives the highest iand material assistance to the liberation movement in South Africa and SWAPO of Namibia.; freedom. which will be *: Labour will also work with our trade union colleagues to assist the non-ractal trade unions inWe uphold the rights c: South Africa. invasion of Afghanistan
{We will carry through a systematic programme of economic disengagement from South Africa: against all military inter:
lby supporting comprehensive mandatory sanctions at the UN and curtailing our economic relanionsrights wherever they occz
4with the regime. The details of our policy towards Southern Africa are set out in Labour'saf the government conc:
Programme l982. organisations. We will pr:
We will protect che ope:
LATIN AMERICAin Britain. Our policy on:
ILatin America is a conunent in crisis. The world recession and severe financial difficulties haveWe will not deport indivic added to the burden of already frail economies. Democracy is established in very few countries:: We will also take nto torture and death are instruments of control in many areas. not be given to yovernmer
Central America is of particular concern. Treated for decades by the United States as itsbe given to the victims of backyard, the countries of this region have almost without exception failed to establish 4 tradition of representative democracy. Millions of people have endured a lifetime of oppression and deprivation. In recent years, the pressure for social change to respond to basic needs has grown intense. but has met with the firm resistance of the wealthy and the powerful, invariably backed by Washington. This is true of El Salvador. Nicaragua and Guatemala. Labour rejects US policy in Central America. Regrettably, the Tory government has connected Britain with that policy by its slavish support for everything the Reagan administration says and does. This applies even in the case of Guatemala. which the US is rearming, when it lays claim to Belize. to whose defence, we are committed.
Labour will do evervthing in its power to weaken Latin America’s repressive governments bv.
©for example. withdrawing diplomatic representation, opposing multilateral loans. Sanding arms sales and drawing international attention to human tights violanionas. Our detailed policy is set outin Lubeur's Programme l982.
FALKLAND ISLANOS
Mrs Thatcher's policy of Fortress Fulkdands is imposing an intolerable burden both on the British people and on the inhabitants of the Falklands themselves. The war. which wiser policies could have avoided, have already cost us £l, OOO million. On top of that the Conservative government plans to spend £6O million a year for the indefinite future on garrisoning the islands - £l):
million per vear for every Falklands family.
With four British servicemen on the islands to every adult male Falklander, the traditional way of life of this rural community is being destroyed. Yet at the same time Mrs Thatcher is allowing
British firms to equip warships for the Argentine dictatorship and is lending money to General
Bignune to spend oa arms. A Labour government would not sell arms to any Argentine government which was hostile to Britain or denied civil rights and democratic freedoms to is
332, LABOUR MANIFESTO a. inklands and the he Arab-Isracli conflict remains aown peopic. Labour beheves that Britain must restore normal inks betwee on fading enemas sion, though not the only one. TheLatin American mainland. and that the United Nations must be i estintan peoples for the realisationsettlement of the problem.
urity in the state of Israel within, Pvotional as well as political ties exist between Britain and many of the Noeane of Asia. hk including the establishment of awas the l945 Labour government which gave independence to india and a ot the countries s~ession of human and civil rights in many$; Labour is concerned about the suppressa‘bour government ipation by foreign forces demandsof Asia. and we will support every extension of democracy in the region. Ata&
- independence, sovercignty andwill end military involvement with those he Ton that have onereens students’ fees has already
“econstruction. The Labour Party is concerned that the Tory policy;: “pc j stain neks::‘ell as elsewke courses in Britain.
°9 Turkish membership of NATOaffected the ability of students from Asia. as well as elsewhere. to undertake ¢
Upon the Turkish people and williSteps will be taken to improve the position, as laid out in a pre O that China can hecome more
“bis is achieved we shall OpposeiLabour believes in a closer understanding with China. and hopes and the world economy. We: involved in iiscussions an peace. disa¥.. i directly involved in international discus in peace. mesperaus future for the man rights throughout the Middle: will hold talks with China with the aim of securing a peaceful and praspe edom. democracy. ewil and tradele of Hong Kong.;. ore iee epan is a major power in the world economy We hope to rae xen ‘Sno te remove cippas and territorial integrity ofactive part in a concerted expansion of the economies of the ee a att tele io bridee the dhe UN for as long as boththe obstacles that her trade policies now create. We also hope Thi 4 orld.. division between North and South by increasing her aid to the Thir. HUMAN RIGHTS_. Fitv. civil rights. democracy and ort ts Opponents. giving financialLabour gives the highest priority to the protection of human Cignity il rig;
Africa and SWAPO of Namibia. freedom, which will be reflected in all that a Labour oem Ae dingly. we condemn the Soviet st the non-racial trade unions inWe uphold the rights of all nations to self-determination Accor er we America, We warn invasion of Afghanistan and US support for repressive regimes in a oo ons of human
Eo...~N 2lOl8 $ a isengagement from South Africaagainst all military interventions contrary to the UN Charter. ¢ ae whatevet the complexion curtailing our economic relationsrights wherever thes occur. whether in Poland. Turkey or! reer. n rights in all intereational
Africa are set out in Labour'sof the government concerned Labour will further the cause of vee re s organisations. We will press for suspension from NATO o wc their couernk, l'S representatives
We will protect the opponents of regimes from harassment by their government's rep. nent in Britain ‘Our policy on refugees will he more compassionate than that of the Tory a “m... Ne will not deport individuals who would face arrest or death in their own countries + aid will
Segre Bnancial difficulties havenea itt lrh im accoumt human rights considerations when giving aid. Official aid wil waplished in very few countries, ot wen lO governments that persistently violate civil and trade union rights. Help will instead nat beito g;.
‘es by the United States as itsbe given to the viciims of repre on failed to establish a tradition;: @ lifetime of Oppression and
“pond to baste needs has grown che powerful. Invariably backed mala. Labour rejects US policy
-cled Britain with that policy bs ajoes. This applies even in aint cd Belize. to whose defence
-u’s Tepressive governments by.
ulttiateral loans. banning arms ons Our detailed policy is set
Ne burden both on the British vat Which wiser policies coule
TPQ OMAR CTC governmen:
SSOning Me asiunds - £)+7
“alkiander. the traditional way ume Mrs Thatcher is allowing is lending money to General sell army to any Argentine
‘O democratic freedoms to its333