ISl4 62O" & AiCONSERVATIVE MANIFESTOsy: The Conservative Party Manifesto: NL? we stand firm on principles yet are reat;«O negotiate and prepared to take decisive action._;: FOUNDED IN STRENGTHi:
C3The ability to act internationally does not come without effort. ll must be founded on a strong economy.
I he NextOveSOrwaland a robust defence. This Government took the necessary steps to build up both. Success has followed.
Prudent financial policies have made Britain one of the world's largest creditors. Today we are able to
I; shape world efforts to sustain trade and promote international monetary cooperation.
We gave a lead in Nato and installed Cruise missiles. Today, as a result, the Soviet Union is at last;
IFOREWORD by The Rt. Hon. Margaret Thatcherprepared to negotiate to remove its own missiles targeted against us.
has changed - changed for the betterThis Government is modernising our own independent deterrent. Today Britain retains an indepen-.: Ct! changed -7°: Noe.
‘9 We havc dischvered a new strength and a new pride. We have fostered a new spirit of enterprise. WeOe eh eater we howe netoniy Seoul or enone Pam reestablished our world reputation; have risen to fresh challenges at home and abroad. Once again, our economy is strong. Our industries arewe have also regained our national self-respect. But restoring a country’s greatness is not easy. The new
None On ike ner prosperity, we are building a better Health Service and providing more care forConservative policies met bitter resistance every step of the way.
those in need. Living standards are higher than ever before. Our people have the protection of a strongerIREMEMBER defence and more po by her own efforts. We trusted in the chrand talents of our people. TheI The year-long coal strike, with its violence and intimidation on a massive scale. It failed and mining tain has come riaracter{or{ivii.
British instinct is for choice and ema ingsith Given the ois Por shares OreosPrete bette ae have ad to fight to ensure that Britain paid no more than its fair share of the European policies, many more familics now enjoy~‘he°I Community Budget. We now get automatic rebates - this year, over £l.3 billion.: I
Together we are building One Nation of free, prosperous and responsible families and people. AThe doubling of the oil price which confronted the new Government with a world-wide recession -
Conservative dream is at last becoming a reality. and, more recently, an equally dramatic fall in the oil price which halved government oil revenues and ini
This Manifesto points the way forward. earlier times would have threatened a collapse of confidence in the pound. Both these oil “shocks” were sucessfully withstood by prudent policies which have produced a sustained growth of prosperity.
He BRITISH RE vivat vision for the Britain of the l99Os and beyond, a future based on thePielasebeaie Saved challenge of the Falklands War. have stood firm, ovor even3 aspirations of millions. of individuals and the families sini pete a eee a fulfilment For the- survived such difficulties? Does anyone suppose that the Labour Party would have resisted, let alone oe: forward to.‘ woes eye. f; j
IFoie ina eeeroarates the Britain of today from the Britain ofthe late l97Os. Is it really only such aSod ve ane aed nt Rone ee eee eat ine Liberals or the Social Democrats ithat inflation rose to an atinual rate of 27 per cent? That the leader of the Transport andow€ dh ha s°ved thre © these difficultrea e back fin fte ‘a
General Workers’ Union was widely seen as the most powerful man in the land? That a minority Labour I __ Parties would have persevered through all these difficulties to break the back of inflation and restore
Government, staggering from crisis to crisis on borrowed money, was nonetheless maintained in powerI?
by the Liberal Party in return for the paper concession of a Lib-Lab pact? And that Labour $ much: I A STRONG AND STABLE GOVERNMENT
Ivaunted pay pact with the unions collapsed in the industrial ana he country was. gripped by a creeping' How has it been done? All these improvements in the wealth and standing of our country have only beenf
Iwhich the dead went unburied, rubbish piled TMp in the streets, possible because we have had a strong government with sound policies and a decisive majority in:
al eoaele retrospect tOI be the history of ‘another country. Yet these things happened and people hadParliament. A weak government with uncertain policies would not have known how to withstand the3
Ivfrday life; Pressures upon it, a government without a good overall majority in Parliament would not have been to accept them as an unavoidable part of everyday life. allowed to do so; and a strong government with unsound policies would have been a positive force forq disaster. a
REVERSI S THE DECLINEws”FIn this election, only the Conservative Party is offering strong, decisive and united government.;
Remember the conventional wisdom of the day. The British people were “ungovernable. We were inI¢» Onlyyi8, eng3
’:“Brtich di ” Britaii bar]ible decline”.; the grip of an incurable “British disease”. Britain was heading for “irreversib! line has beenI ‘THE NEXT MOVES FORWARD well the people were not ungovernable, the disease was not incurable, and the decline hasI The next Conservative Government will build on the achievements of the past eight years with a full
Teversed.:: if positive reform. We will continue: i
-ewei. We have moved from the I --«s Programme of posie will co’a;4 bot today i i he avail league of m ea countries. growth. We have movI @ to pursue policies of sound financial management, the conquest of inflation, the promotion of
In Britain today inflation has reached its lowest levels for almost twenty years. -ISicrprise and the growth of employment:. d savi.. ve:
In Britain today, the number of strikes has dropped to the lowest levels for 5O years..@to aethe ownership of homes, shares, pensions and savings ever more widely to give families;
In Britain today, far from being in debt to the IMF, we have built up our net overseas assets to their”greater financial independence; a. oo,. i highest level since the Second World War - higher than France, Germany and the United States, secondIba sive people greater choice and responsibility over their own lives in important areas such as housing; ony sine today, living standards are higher than ever before in our history.@ to improve the well-being of the people through beter health care, and to safeguard the living, istiifeel of the country - the new enthusiasm forstandards of those who have to depend on the community,;.' ene these are ald sae ie nae aha ‘ oie can prosper with the best. Investment in° to improve the quality of sfe by ne the best of our heritage and our countryside, and by} itish indis risii: loying almost two-thirds of our workforce, ostering provision for the arts and sport, aenceatee a vast Ane once Quaings And our tnanufacturers are travelling the globe with a newO a tial apes surone reade ship where governent needs to be strong - in protecting the nation against setPteecitizen confidence born of the knowledge that Britain is internationally competitive again. We intended to press on with the radical Conservative reform which we embarked upon in l979, andi
THE WORLD STAGEwhich has already revived the spirit of our people and restored the reputation of our country.
iiival infined to increased economic strength. Britain is also playing a major partI rai ati eae se om the White House through Europe to the Kremlin, our voice is heardon + WIDER OWNERSHIP AND GREATER OPPORTUNITY arms control, on East-West issues, on human rights, on the Middle East and on African affairs. fConservatives aim to extend as widely as possible the opportunity to own property and build up capital,
- With the Conservative Government, Britain has played a strong and responsible role internationally. I to exercise real choice in education, and to develop economic independence and security.
We have defended civilised values by fighting terrorism relentlessly. We have secured our national Our goal is a capital-owning democracy of people and families who exercise power over their own interests, as when we liberated the Falklands. We have been ready to settle long-standing issues like Honglives in the most direct way. They would take the important decisions - as tenants, home-owners,:
Kong where we reached an agreement to safeguard the way of life of the people. parents, employees, and trade unionists - rather than having them taken for them.;
Time and again we have shown that we possess the essential requirements of successful diplomacy: Of course, it is not possible to give people independence. That is something we must all achieve by:
28K289CONSERVATIVE MANIFESTOCONSERVATIVE MANIFESTO by our own efforts. But what this Conservative Government has done is to mat Sasier for people torents of landlords will be limited to {Yonable rate of return, and the tenant's security of tenure will be2 acquire independence for themselves: limited to the term of the lease, which would not be less than six months. This will bring back into use.
@ by introducing the right to buy council houses;:; many of the 55O, OOO private dwellings which now stand empty because of controls, as well as making the
@ by returning nationalised industries to the people in ways that encourage the widest possible spread ofprovision of new rented housing 3 more attractive investment.° ownership; And we will revise the housing benefit system to ensure that it prevents landlords from increasing
@ by making it easier to buy shares in British industry through employee share schemes and Personalrents to unreasonable levels at the taxpayer's expense..
Equity Plans.. All existing private and housing association tenants will continue to have their present protection in
These opportunities - all too often introduced in the teeth of fierce resistance from the Oppositionrespect of rents and security of tenure.
parties - have achieved spectacular results. There has been a surge of home-ownership, share-owner-We will strengthen the law against harassment and unlawful eviction.
jship, and self reliance.;
And because these first-time shareholders and home-owners are more independent, they develop aRights for Council Tenants more independent outlook. They are no longer content that some of the most important decision in theirMany council estates built in the Sixties and Seventies are badly designed, vulnerable to crime and lives - what school their children attend, for example, or whether or not to go on strike - should be takenIvandalism, and in bad repair. In many areas, rent arrears are high. In all, over llO, OOO council dwellings by officialdom or trade union bosses. People want to decide such things for themselves. stand empty. Yet it is often difficult for tenants to move. If they are ever to enjoy the prospect of
In this way the scope of individual responsibility is widened, the family is strengthened, and volun-independence, municipal monopoly must be replaced by choice in renting.
tary bodies flourish. State power is checked and opportunities are spread throughout society. OwnershipWe will give groups of tenants the right to form tenant cooperatives, owning and running their and independence cease to be the privileges of a few and become the birthright of all.; management and budget for themselves. They will also have the right to ask other institutions to take
In this way One Nation is finally reached ~ not by a single people being conscripted into an organisedover their housing. Tenants who wish to remain with the local authority will be able to do so.
socialist programme but by millions of people building their own lives in their own way. We will give each council house tenant individually the right to transfer the ownership of his or her house to a housing association or other independent, approved landlord.
BETTER HOUSING FOR ALLIn some areas more may be necessary. The success of Estate Action and Housing Action Areas shows
Home Ownership.;..;. how a carefully targeted approach can transform the area of poor housing and give people there new
Nowhere has the spread of ownership been more significant than in housing. Buying their own home ishope. Our Urban Development Corporations have been successful in restoring derelict industrial areas.
the first step most people take towards building up capital to hand down to their children and grandchilWe believe that a similar approach could be adopted for housing in some places. We will take powers to dren, It gives people a stake in society - something to conserve. It is the foundation stone of a capital-create Housing Action Trusts - initially as a pilot scheme - to take over such housing, renovate it, and owning democracy.: aspass it on to different tenures and ownerships, including housing associations, tenant cooperatives,
A home should be a source of pride and independence to the family living in it, regardless of whetherowner-occupiers or approved private landlords.
it is owned or rented. We will ensure that every family in the land has an opportunity to make it so. We will reform the structure of local authority housing accounts so that public funds are directed at
Home-ownership has been the great success story of housing policy in the last eight years. Onethe problems of repair and renovation; maintenance and management are improved; resources are million council tenants have become home-owners and another one and a half million more familiesdirected to the areas where the problems are greatest; rent arrears are reduced; and fewer houses are left have become home-owners for the first time.,.; empty.
Two out of every three homes are now owned by the people who live in them. This is a very highHousing is the biggest single investment that most people make ~ whether in money or in time, skill jproportion, one of the largest in the world. We are determined to make it larger still. and effort. In the last eight years, as a result of our policies, we have seen a dramatic increase in homeSome people are still deterred by the costs and complications of house purchase. That is why we mustownership. In the next five years, we will complement that with policies designed to improve the supply look for new ways to make house-buying simpler and easier. Our abolition of the conveyancing monopo-and condition of the rented housing stock.
ly has already made it cheaper.;
We will keep the present system of mortgage tax relief. A CAPITAL-OWNING DEMOCRACY
We will target improvement grants to where they are most needed - the least well-off. To meet theShare ownershi special needs of old people, we will ensure that all local authorities have powers to give improvementIHhiP'ff financiision fi grants, where necessary, for properties where elderly people move in with relatives. We will extend the 3Oome-ownership leads naturally to other forms of financial provision for the future ~ notably to r cent horsing association grant to help schemes for old people. pensions and share-ownership. Half of the working population are in occupational pension schemes, but pein l979 only seven per cent of the population held shares,
A right to rent; People were deterred by the sheer unfamiliarity of owning shares. Young people were reluctant to
Most problems in housing now arise in the rented sector. Controls, although well-meant, have dramati-save for a retirement which seemed far away. And most tax incentives encouraged saving through cally reduced the private rented accommodation to a mere 8 per cent of the housing market. -institutions rather than directly.;.
This restricts housing choice and hinders the economy. People looking for work cannot easily moveWith a Conservative Government, all that has been changing. We were determined to make shareto a different area to do so. Those who find work may not be able to find rented accommodation nearby. ownership available to the whole nation. Just as with cars, television sets, washing machines and foreign
Those who would prefer to rent rather than buy are forced to become reluctant owner-occupiers or toholidays, it would no longer be a privilege for ihe few; it would become the expectation of the many. We swell the queue for council houses. Some may even become temporarily homeless. achieved this historic transformation in three ways:;;
And it is not only these people and their families who suffer from the shortages of homes for rent. TheiFirst, we introduced major tax incentives for employee share-ownership. Seven out of the last eight economy as a whole is damaged when workers cannot move to fill jobs because there are no homes to{budgets have included measures to encourage people to purchase shares in the company in which they iihood. iWOrK.
ae mee eemedied. We have already taken some modest steps in this direction by making itiSecond, starting this year, we brought in Personal Equity Plans, which enable people to invest in easier to part-own or part-rent homes through shared ownership; by bringing in and widening the schemeBritish industry entirely free of tax. ae;:
for assured tenancies; by our system of shortholds; and by providing a new 3O per cent housingThird, we embarked on a major programme of Privatisation, insisting that small investors and association grant to build hostels for young workers. We have also directly tackled the problem ofemployees of the privatised companies should have a fair chance to join in the buying.; homelessness through new grants to housing associations and other measures.: The results have been dramatic, and the direct consequence of government policy. Share ownership
More must now be done. The next Conservative Government, having already implemented the nghthas trebied. Almost one in five of the adult population now owns shares directly. And the figure willi to buy, will increase practical opportunities to rent.; continue to rise. Of this total, the majority are first-time shareholders and most of them own shares in
We must attract new private investment into rented housing - both from large institutions such aseither privatised companies or the TSB group. One-and-ahalf million people hold shares in the com-.
building societies and housing associations as well as from small private landlords. To do this we intend, panies where they work.; oo.;:
in particular, to build on two initiatives we have already taken.; After eight years of Conservative Government, Britain is now in the forefront of a world-wide
First, to encourage more investment by institutions, we will extend the system of assured tenancies. revolution in extending ownership. One in every five British adults now owns shares compared to one in
This will permit new lettings in which rents and the period of lease will be freely agreed between tenantsten Frenchmen, and one in. twenty Japanese. Only the Americans, where a quarter of the people are and landlords, The tenant will have security of tenure and will renegotiate the rent at the end of the lease, shareholders, remains ahead - and the gap is narrowing...
with provision for arbitration if necessary. This is the first stage of a profound and progressive social transformation - popular capitalism.
Second, to encourage new lettings by smaller landlords, we will develop the system of shorthold, TheOwning a direct stake in industry not only enhances personal independence; it also gives a heightened
29O.29lICONSERVATIVE MANIFESTOaICONSERVATIVE MANIFESTO sense of involvement and pride in British business. More realistic attitudes to profit an <avestment take: If, ina particular school, parents and OQ. bodies wish to become independent of thethe« root. And the foundations of British coment O aoan capital further strong ee nent; will be given the choice to do so. Those schools Sich opt out of LEA control will receive a full grant le wion wii5ment: i; Fini‘
IWe will oentinue to extend share-ownership as we have done with home-ownership. direct from the Department of Education and Science. They would become independent charitable7
We will reintroduce our proposed tax incentives for profit-repay. In the area covered by the Inner London Education Authority, where entire borough councils wish to
We will privatise more state industries in ways that increase share-ownership, both for the employeesbecome independent of the LEA, they will be able to submit proposals to the Soetanat State requesting and for the public at large. permission to take over the provision of education within their boundaries.
RAISING STANDARDS IN EDUCATIONVillage Schools
Parents want schools to provide their children with the knowledge, training and character that will fitWe recognise the important contribution made by small rural primary schools to education and to the them for today’s world. They want them to be taught basic educationa! skills. They want schools that willcommunity life of our villages.
encourage moral values: honesty, hard work and responsibility. And they should have the right to choseWe will ensure, therefore, that the future of these schools is judged by wider factors than merely the those schools which do these things for their children. number of pupils attending them.
Pre-School Education
Raising Standards in our Schoolsbia, irces for pupils than ever before. Wi nservatives:; baie barielere he!:
@ Spending per primary school pupit has risen by l7 per cent after allowing for inflation and perDiversity of Provision is desirable. LEAs should look to support the voluntary sector alongside their own secondary pupil by 2O per cent under our Governméntbef
© There are more teachers in proportion to puplever Delors. A Better Career for Teachers
@ British schools are world leaders in the use of computers in the cassre niformt higher standardsWe recognise the importance of teachers and wish to enhance their professional status. The Government
But money alone is not enough. Increased resources have not produced uniformly higher stancards. has provided a record amount of money to increase their pay by an average l6.4 per cent this year - 25
~Parents and employers are rightly concerned that not enough children master the basic skills, that someent over l8 months. Our newward willpa Yege lO. i to enter the cot airrelevant to a good education, and that standards of personal discipline andper ceonths. Ourpay awill encourage able young people to en’career of what is taught seems ahs, education is used for political indoctrination and sexual -teaching and reward the many good teachers already in the profession.
aspirations are too low. In certain Coe ih vt reformpoThe Burnham negotiating machinery finally broke down and has been temporarily replaced by an:
propaganda. The time has now come for schoo! reform. Interim Advisory Committee. The Government wants an effective and permanent machinery for settling teachers’ pay, in which the interests of all parties will be recognised.
Four Major ReformsThe Government will produce a Green Paper setting out the various alternatives and will enter into
First, we will establish a National Core Curriculum... wide consultations with a view to establishing a new and effective machinery.
It is vital to ensure that all pupils between the ages of 5 to l6 study a basic range of subjects -;
Iincluding maths, English, and science. In each of these basic subjects syllabuses will be published andHIGHER AND FURTHER EDUCATION attainment levels set so that the progress of pupils can be assessed at around ages 7, ll and l4, and inThe British system of higher education is among the best in the world. It ranges from universities to
Ipreparation for the GCSE at l6. Parents, teachers and pupils will then know how well each child is doing. further education colleges providing skills and qualifications. We recognise the value of research and
We will consult widely among those concerned in establishing the curriculum. scholarship for their own sake. At the same time, we must meet the nation’s demand for highly qualified
ISecond, within five years governing bodies and head teachers of all secondary schools and manymanpower to compete in international markets.} primary schools will be given control of their own budgets...‘Building on our achievements since l979 ~ l57, OOO more full-time and part-time students - we want;
They know best the needs of their schools. With this independence, they will manage their resourcesto expand higher education opportunities still further. By l99O, we plan to increase student numbers by a and decide their priorities, covering the cost of books, equipment, maintenance and staff. Several pilotfurther 5O, OOO and to raise the proportion of l8year-olds in higher education.
schemes for financial devolution to schools have already proved their worth, such as those in CamWe will replace the University Grants Committee with an independent statutory body on the lines bridgeshire and Solihull. recommended by the Croham Committee. The new body will be called the Universities Funding
Third, we will increase parental choice. Council (UFC) and will have broadly equal numbers of academic and non-academic members with a
The most corcistent pressure for high standards of schools comes from parents. They have a powerfulchairman who has substantial experience outside the academic world. The primary responsibility of the incentive to ensure that their children receive a good education. We have already done much through theUFC will be the allocation of funds to individual universities under new contractual agreements.
l98O and l986 Education Acts so that parents can make their voice heard. But parents still need betterPolytechnics are today strong, successful and mature institutions. They are complementary to the opportunities to send their children to the school of their choice. That would be the best guarantee ofuniversities. Their present structure, under local authorities, is inappropriate for an expanding nationald higher standards. To achieve this:. rarole.
We will ensure that Local Education Authorities (LEAs) set school budgets in line with the number ofAs part of our policy to delegate power and responsibility, we will legislate to convert the polytechnics:
pupils who will be attending each school... and other mainly higher education colleges in England to free-standing corporate bodies under boards ofi
Schools will be required to enrol children up to the school’s agreed physical capacity instead ofgovernors,:
artificially restricting pupil numbers, as can happen today. Popular schools, which have earned parentWe will set up a new Polytechnics and Colleges Funding Council independent of central Govern-:
support by offering good education, will then be able to expand beyond present pupil numbers. _ment, in place of local authority control.4
These steps will compel schools to respond to the views of parents. But there must also be variety ofAs part of our aim to widen access to higher education we have begun a review of student supportf educational provision so that parents can better compare one school with another.; which is the most generous in the western world. We need to modernise this system which has not:
We will therefore support the coexistence of a variety of schools - comprehensive, grammar, ichanged for 25 years. The purpose of the review is to improve the overall prospects of students so that secondary modern, voluntary controlled and aided, independent, sixth form and tertiary colleges~ as more are encouraged to enter higher education. No final conclusions have been reached, but we believe; well as the reasonable rights of schools to retain their sixth forms, all of which will give parents greaterithat topup loans to supplement grants are one way, among others, of bringing in new finance to help‘ choice and lead to higher standards.'students and relieve pressure on their parents.4
We will establish a pilot iia na ¢iy Technology Colleges. Already two have been announced and: We will take care I to ensure that the best aspects of the present system are retained in any new; support for more has been pled, industrial sponsors. proposals which we bringard.‘
We will expand the Assisted Places Scheme to 35, OOO. This highly successful scheme has enabled:.
25, OOO talented children from less-well-off backgrounds to gain places at the 23O independent schoolsTRADE UNIONS:
currently in the scheme..;... It is not only in relation to government, however, that people's right to choice and independence must be:
We will continue to defend the right to independent education as part of a free society. It is undersafeguarded and extended. Great social institutions can sometimes become too powerful and cease to; threat from all the other parties. represent their members, denying them any control over the decisions taken in their name and eveni
Fourth, we will allow state schools to opt out of LEA control. forcing them to act against their own interests. That was the case with trade unions before l979.:
292293: ICONSERVATIVE MANIFESTO, CONSERVATIVE MANIFESTO
Since then, Conservative reforms have redressed the balance between the individ_ana his union, LOWER TAXESC)
Ipreventing coercion of the majority by activists and militants. These highly successful and popularWe are the only Party that believes in lower taxation.
measures have encouraged democracy within the unions, restrained the abuses of secondary action andAs the Party determined to achieve growing prosperity we recognise that it is people who create picketing, reversed the growth of closed shops, restored the rights of redress against unions actingwealth, not governments. Lower taxation, coupled with lower inflation, makes everyone better off. It‘ unlawfully, and removed the immunity of unions that call a strike without a fair ballot. encourages people to work harder, to be inventive and to take risks. It promotes a climate of enterprise
The result has been a transformation of shop-floor relations, allowing management and workforce toand initiative.
cooperate to improve working practices and introduce new technology to mutual gain. In the nextLower tax on earnings enables people to build up savings to give them financial security in later life.
Parliament we will protect the rights of individual trade union members. Lower taxation, by increasing take-home pay without adding to industry's costs, improves competiWe will introduce legislation to:.;;; liveness and helps with jobs. And tax relief for charitable donations encourages more people to give -;
@ empower individual members to stop their unions calling them out on strike without first holding aand to give more generously.
secret ballot of members, onLo: aThere is a strong moral case for reducing taxation. High taxes deprive people of their independence
@ protect individual members from disciplinary action if they refuse to join a strike they disagree with, and make their choices for them. The desire to do better for one’s family is one of the strongest motives:
© ensure that all members of trade union governing bodies are elected by secret ballot at least once everyin human nature. As a party committed to the family and opposed to the over-powerful State, we want; five years;.. people to keep more of what they earn, and to have more freedom of choice about what they do for e make independently supervised postal we compulsory for against unfair dismissal for all nonthemselves, their families and for others less fortunate.
@ limit further abuse O! dlop by providing protection agI.-Governments should trustto spend their own money sensibly and decently; high taxation:
union employees, and removing any legal immunity from industrial action to establish or enforce aprevents them doing so. people to spe: yyy; high on acefeguards on the use of union funds; That is why we have:
provice new saleg!. co},*eases-@ cut the basic rate from 33 pence to 27 pence in the £, and increased the personal allowances (the' e establish anew trade union commissioner with the power to help individual trade unionists to enforcestarting point for paying tax) by 2 per cent more than inflation.
their fundamental rights. Uf Labour's tax regime were still in force, the family man on average earnings would today be paying:
more than £5OO per year in extra income tax: a headmaster married to a nurse would be paying more than:
BUILDING PROSPERITY AND EMPLOYMENT;£l,3OO extra;
_Since this Government took office in l979, we have restored honest money and established a stable© reduced sharply the absurd top rates of tax inherited from Labour which were causing so many of ourE economic framework in which business can flourish. We have been careful not to spend money beforemost talented people to work abroad:;; we earned it. We have brought the nation back to living within its means. We have massively rebuilt our@ increased greatly the tax relief for charitable donations. Giving to charities has doubled since we first:
international assets. We have refused to be drawn into an auction of pledges for higher spending that thetook office;.;;‘ country simply could not afford. We have balanced the books. We have paid our way.@ abolished four taxes completely: the national insurance surcharge - the tax which Labour put on jobs
The results of been dramatic:;- the investment income surcharge, the development land tax and the lifetime gifts tax;;7
@ Despite the coal strike and the collapse of the oil price, Britain has moved from being bottom to the@ reformed and simplified corporation tax, and cut its rate to the lowest of any major industrial country;:
top of the growth league of major European countries.@ cut the small business corporation tax rate by more than a third, and extended it to many more small:
I@ Inflation has reached its lowest levels for almost 2O years.; businesses;..
@ The basic rate of income tax has been cut from 33 pence to 27 pence, four taxes have been abolished,@ reformed and reduced capital taxes as well as slashing stamp duty. H
-_and almost a million and a half people have been taken out of the income tax altogether. In every case where taxes have been reformed and reduced there has been an increase in the amount of
© Over a million extra jobs have been created since l983 - more than in the rest of the Europeantax collected.!
Community put together... Labour totally fail to understand the benefits this brings to everyone. Today they openly threaten to‘
@ Unemployment, a problem throughout Europe, is now firmly on a downward trend - with youthraise taxation. To fulfil their plans, they would have to raise taxes substantially. Indeed, all the Opposil unemployment in this country below the European average. vastion parties - Labour, Liberals and SDP - would raise taxation. We believe that it is precisely the wrongY
@ We have rebuilt our net overseas assets to some £llO billion from a mere £l2 billion when we firstthing to do. j took office. This will provide substantial foreign earnings in the years ahead and a cushion, should oilIt will be our aim to do the opposite.; revenues fall..: In the next Parliament: i
While the Opposition parties cling to the failed policies of the past, our strategy has become widelyWe aim to reduce the burden of taxation.:
accepted abroad, Socialist Spain as well as Christian Democratic Germany, Social Democratic SwedenIn particular, we will cut income tax still further and reduce the basic rate to 25 pence in the £ as soonk as well as France, Labour New Zeealand and Conservative Canada, all accept that governments mustas we prudently can.; reduce their borrowing, curb state spending, reduce taxation, privatise state firms and do away withWe will continue the process of tax reform. i unnecessary controls. What we began in l979 is today common international practice.
SPENDING WE CAN AFFORDH
STABLE PRICESaOver the past eight years we have managed the nation’s finances with care. Even allowing for inflation,}
Our greatest economic challenge on entering office was to defeat inflation. Rampant inflation under thethis has enabled us to spend substantially more on the Health Service (up by 3l per cent), defence (up byi
Labour Government, when money lost a quarter of its value in a single year, had reduced our economy23 per cent), roads (up by l7 per cent), education per pupil (up by l8 per cent), the police and the battle: "to “the sick man of Europe”.;;; against crime (up by 47 per cent), the disabled and long-term sick (up by 72 per cent), and government
Nothing erodes a country’s competitive edge faster than inflation. Nothing so undermines personaltraining schemes (up by l2O per cent)._; thrift and independence as to see the value of a lifetime's savings eaten away in retirement throughHow have we been able to do this without running into the financial crises which Labour's spending; spiralling prices. And nothing threatens the social fabric of a nation more than the conflicts andpolicies invariably set off?}j:
divisiveness which inflation creates._.;... First, we have been prudent with the nation’s money. We have slashed public borrowing and soughtE
Our success in the battle against inflation has been the key to Britain's economic revival. It requiredI savings in government expenditure wherever they could sensibly be found./q firm control of public expenditure, a substantial reduction in government borrowing, curbing the growth: Second, we are engaged in steadily reducing the share of the nation’s income taken by the State. ThisI of money in circulation, maintaining financial discipline, stimulating competition and moderating trademeans that more will be left for families and for business to invest - the only safe route to higher growthi i, in the economy.!
ne The Opposition parties opposed nearly every aspect of this strategy. If even some of their policiesThird, we have constantly improved the efficiency of the public services, ensuring that we get moreI were implemented today, higher borrowing and higher spending would once again unleash inflation. value for every pound spent.. i
There is no better yardstick of a party's fitness to govern than its attitude to inflation. Nothing is soFor the next Parliament:.-I politically immoral as a party that ignores that yardstick.. Our aim is the ensure that public expenditure takes a steadily smaller share of our national income. i
The Conservative Government will continue to put the conquest of inflation as our first objective. Within that objective, we will continue to spend more on our priorities. We have set out our plans forI
We will not be content until we have stable prices, with inflation eradicated altogether. further increased spending in these areas over the next three years.:
294295ICONSERVATIVE MANIFESTOCONSERVATIVE MANIFESTO
ICREATING NEW JOBSC), The Third GuaranteeC);:
IHigh unemployment is one of the most intractable problems facing all Western industrial countries. In addition to these major programmes we have taken one further important step.;4
We understand the anxiety and stress which unemployment can cause. For almost a year unemploy-. Restart is a programme we have set up for interviewing and counselling the long-term unemployed toE ment in the United Kingdom has fallen faster than among any of our major competitors in Europe, andhelp them into a job or training. Everyone who has been unemployed for more than one year has alreadya faster than at any time since l973, It is falling because of the growth and enterprise we have achieved, given an interview.:,;.
assisted by the unemployment and training programmes we have developed... We will guarantee to provide the Restart service in the future at six-monthly intervals, to all those:
Since we were last reelected in l983, the number of jobs has risen by over I million - more than inwho have been unemployed for more than six months.;;.{ the rest of the European Community put together. This Government has established the conditions inOver the next five years we will aim, through the Restart interviews, to offer everyone who is under which business can prosper and create new jobs. This has not just been achieved through the5O, and who has been unemployed for more than two years, a place in the Job Training Scheme or in the' revitalisation of traditional industries. We have encouraged growth in those crucial areas of new enter-new Community Programme, in a JobClub or in the Enterprise Allowance Scheme.
prise which provide the foundation for the jobs of the future - self-employment, small firms, theRI Assista creation of new enterprise, the expanding service sector - particularly tourism and leisure - and newegionastanceing f:;;:
technology. terprises of Without sufficient people tonew system of regional aserance, niroduced in l984, ensures that aud is elireealy targeted tose de the imorrow. Withou..:
star cou basipesses the faucet en whe economy is in jeopardy. Today we have the highest numbercreation of new jobs. New activities in the service sector from which so many of the jobs comes have alsof of self-employed for over 6O years. One worker in ten is now his own boss - or her own boss, since abeen made eligible for assistance. Under the new policy, offers of assistance have already been made; quarter of the self-employed are women. Indeed, the eighties have seen almost three-quarters ofa millionwhich should secure almost 3OO, OOO jobs. We will continue to ensure that assistance is directed where it; people become self-employed. More and more of our young people today seck self-employment as ais most needed.
worthwhile career. It is particularly encouraging that almost half of the growth in self-employment sinceTHE EMPLOYMENT AND TRAINING SERVICE
PO en ng with all businesses, have benefitted from our management of the economy. SinceNe will take further steps to provide ca comprehensive service to the unemployment. weal consult the his Government took office, the number of registered businesses has shown a net increase of more thananpower Services Commission about transierning JobCentrespartment oployment so;
‘ber has increased in every region of the country. that they can work more closely with Unemployment Benefit Offices.:
5OO a week - and the number hasryThe Manpower Services Commission would then become primarily a training agency. It is employers;
~who are best equipped to assess their training needs. i
HELPING UNEMPLOYED PEOPLE INTO JOBSllhave developed proWe will increase employer representation on the Commission and its advisory bodies.\
As well as creating a climate in which business could employ more people, wePwn More jobs are being created by business and industry. Nothing would destroy whole industries moreH grammes to help those ou!: sas: effectively than a return to the overmanning and restrictive practices of the l97Os. Our policies form ai uth Training Scheme (YTS) caters for school-leavers aged l6 and l7 who wish to participate in. I Fe: aan.; training and work experience. lop traince is given the opportunity of working towards a recognisedarea ang realistic approach to help people back into work. We will build on prosperity to create more ualification... as.4 person over l8 who has been unemployed for six months or more, who wants to work and train with anBritish business is in a healthier state than it has been for a generation. Output has been rising steadily for:
Iemployer for a recognised qualification. This year it will help nearly a quarter of a million people. fsix years. Productivity has increased at a rate second only to Japan. Company profitability is at itsI
Under our Community Programme, each year over 3OO, OOO people who have been out of work forhighest for over twenty years. Industry has a confidence in the future that would have been unthinkablei
_some time gain valuable experience working on community projects. They have a reference to showseven years ago.
tential employers...: Moreover, setting new records has not been confined to the private sector. Since l983 productivity inE
Pe'We will improve the Community Programme to make it full-time and better able to help those withthe coal industry has risen by over 5O per cent. British Stee! has more than doubled its productivity sincei families. We shall pay those working on the programme an allowance giving a premium over and abovel979 and made a profit last year for the first time in over ten years. British Rail will cost the taxpayer 25f their social security payments. per cent less in subsidy this year than in l983 and without any major route closures. fl
Under the Enterprise Allowance Scheme, 23O, OOO unemployed people have started to work forThe Conservative Government has created a framework in which once again enterprise can flourish -[ themselves. Many of them have now become employers themselves. nto jobs. Oby cutting red tape, by denationalising state-owned companies, by removing unnecessary restrictions, by;
JobClubs were first opened in l985 to help the unemployed help themselves back into jobs. Overabolishing exchange control, by enabling the City of London to become the foremost financial centre in the:
l, OOO have been established, At present two-thirds of those leaving JobClubs go into employment. world, by keeping down prices through extending competition, and by ensuring access to open trade so thatL
The JobClubs programme has been a great success. We aim to expand it. British exporters and consumers can both benefit. I
Our economic success means that we can now do more to help those out of work.
Although youth unemployment has declined in the last year, it still remains a problem. Far too manyPRIVATISATION of our youngsters leave school with an education that has failed to prepare them for the world of work. AtOver a third of the companies and industries which used to be owned by the State have been returned tod the same time, by maintaining high starting wages comparable to those of fully trained crafismen, tradefree enterprise. Productivity and profitability have soared in the newly privatised companies.4 unions have kent many of them out of work...@ In l98O Jaguar made l4, OOO cars a year, losing well over £3, OOO on each car sold. Now the company isE
In l983 we introduced the first Youth Training Scheme. It is now a national two-year programmehard put to keep up with overseas demand and last year sold over 4O, OOO cars, making a pre-tax profit of; aimed at giving young people qualifications for work. over £l2O million.
@ Since the National Freight Consortium was sold to management and staff in l982, pre-tax profits have:
The First Guarantee;; increased sevenfold..;.-
We will now guarantee a place on the Youth Training Scheme to every school-leaver under l8 who is not° past Aerospace, Cable & Wireless, Amersham International and Associated British Ports have all oe di: job.. strikingly increa ir profits.\
Bo ecu none at these school-leavers need to be unemployed. They can remain at school, move toIt is no mystery why privatisation has succeeded. The overwhelming majority of employees havei college, get a job, or receive a guaranteed training. YTS will serve as a bridge between school and work. become shareholders in the newly privatised companies. They want their companies to succeed, Their
We will take steps to ensure that those under l8 who deliberately choose to remain unemployed arecompanies have been released from the detailed controls of Whitehall, and given more freedom to not eligible for benefit. We will, of course, continue to protect other young people, such as those whomanage their own affairs. And they have been exposed to the full commercial disciplines of the customer.; suffer from disabilities, Even former monopolies now face increased competition. F
We will continue the successful programme of privatisation.{:
The Second Guarantee;, In particular, after the privatisation of the British Airports Authority, we will return to the public the4
There are still too many young people without the right qualifications for employment in today’s world. Water Authorities, leaving certain functions to a new National Rivers Authority. i
Within a year we aim to guarantee a place, either on the Job Training Scheme or on the EnterpriseFollowing the success of gas privatisation, with the benefits it brought to employees and millions of
Allowance Scheme or in a JobClub, for everyone aged between l8 and 25 years who has been unem-consumers, we will bring forward proposals for privatising the electricity industry subject to proper' ployed for between six and twelve months. regulation., i
296297iICONSERVATIVE MANIFESTOlanICONSERVATIVE MANIFESTO.
ICOMPETITIONNY@ modernised the transport system (esting over £lO billion in the nation’s motorways, roads,.:
itito the needs of the consumer. It promotes efficiency, holdsairports, seaports and railways,;4.
c ompetition forees ier anovate and ensures that customers get the best possible value for@ since l979 completed over 68O miles of motorway and trunk roads, and 67 bypasses; i money, Accordingly this Government has:@ secured greater efficiency by privatising British Airways, the National Freight Corporation, Sealink:°; jiices ~iices with improved quality andand Associated British Ports,
© deregulated long-distance coach services ~ creating over 7OO new services wpr4y@ increased competition by deregulating long-distance coach services and abolishing local bus licensing..:. These measures have laid the foundations of an efficient and more flexible transport system. We will4.
bs removed ihe snticiens: monopoly makixe ruses ei chener ne buy spectaclesdevelop it further along these lines. We are now returning the nationalised ben rompanics to the private; remov. sI€:: Sector - in many Cases to management buy-outs. We are also privatisinglormer British Airports
@ relaxed advertising contra’s On acooenantss solicitors, stockbrokers and vets, and permitted greaterAu thority ~ the word's leading international airports group.._ n for archis.. t; aaa competition on air routes within the UK and between certain European countries, which hasnew investment to build an extre 43O miles of matoreay and Trunk seads lO l989/9O;7 resulted in cheaper fares, a more responsive service and greater choice of carriers for the passenger, British Rail's plans to invest £5OO million a year over the next three years;,
@ deregulated telecommunications, so that customers can now choose between suppliers when buyingprivate sector financing, construction and operation of the Dartford Bridge and the Channel Tunnel.; telephones and private exchanges, and business can choose between two alternative telecommunications.; networks, we.. ENERGY
@ suspended the Post Office monopoly of time-sensitive and valuable mail, stimulating a dramaticBritain is the only major Western industrial country that is a net exporter of energy. This owes much toi increase in the number of private courier companies. North Sea oil so successfully developed by free enterprise. But it is an advantage that will not last:
We will continue this approach.;. indefinitely.
But competition must be supplemented by legal protection for consumers. Those who make theirCoal will continue to meet much of the steadily rising demand for electricity. Renewable sources of living from their ideas and creations also require epee at main mid selling. energy can make some contribution to the nation’s energy needs, which i why government-sponsored
We will introduce further measures to impose tighter coT. research has been increased. Nevefo reject, as our opponents do, contribution of nuclear:
We will introduce measures to reform the law on copyright, design and performance protection. energy to supplying reliable, low-cost electricity, and to depénd on coal alone, would be short-sighted and irresponsible. i
THE CITY.. The world's resources of fossil fuels will come under increasing strain during the 2lst century; so may:
The City of London is the world’s leading market place in foreign exchange, international bank lendingthe global environment if the buildup of carbon dioxide - the socalled “greenhouse effect” - signifi-; and international insurance. It is a major source of funds for British companies. The financial servicescantly raises temperatures and changes climates.
sector as a whole accounts for nearly 6 per cent of our national income, generates a net £7 billion per yearAfter the most careful and painstaking independent assessment of the safety case for a new to our balance of payments, and employs over one million people. i.; pressurised water reactor at Sizewell, therefore, the Government has decided to Proceed with the next;
° Like other sections of British industry, however, the City was held back by restrictive practices untilphase of our nuclear programme. Il is vital that we continue to give the highest priority to safety. Our:
they were swept away in last year’s “big bang”. This has brought nearer the day when shares can benuclear industry has a record of safety and technical excellence second to none. a bought and sold over the counter in every high Sreet. we have aico given building societies greaterWe intend to go on playing a leading role in the task of developing abundant, low-cost supplies ofI irvices available to the ave. nuclear electricity, and managinassociated wasteucts, f
Ifreesomhe sae, dime, the Conservative Government has introduced a legal framework to protect¥nagingpri
-investors and consumers: ae: SCIENCE ANDR & D;
@ The Companies Acts of l98O and l98l strengthened necoawers Of investigators and increased theGovernment support for research and development amounts to more than £4l2 billion per year. It isi courts’ power to disqualify enor for misconduct ro ain ees who had been guilty of unlawfullarger as a share of our national income than that of the United States, Japan or Germany. A country ofi
@ The Insolvency Act of l985 made it easier to disqualifyour size cannot afford to do everything. These resources need to be better targeted. The task of governi by And now the Financial Services Act of l986 provides the first comprehensive system of investorany altecae basic research and to contribute where business cannot realistically be expected to protection we have had in this country. It also othe ce sneer Ga eenmentin I gO” te InsiderWe will ensure that government spending is firmly directed towards areas of high national priority, f dealing which was first made a criminal offence by the That: ati iies just as much to City fraud as toby extending the role of the Advisory Council on Applied Research and Development, drawing on the
The Conservative Party is the party of law and order. That applies just asyfull range of advice from the academic community and from business.; sie arliament has just approved our proposals for establishing a Serious Fraud Office to improve theTHE CIVIL SERVICE work of investigating and prosecuting the worst cases of fraud and for stream! ule, a evidence. asWe have long had in this country a professional and dedicated public service which is the envy of the
After the election, we will reintroduce our proposals to reform l. world, We are now building on those traditional qualities which can too easily be taken for granted ~ recommended by the Roskill Committee. with new strengths and skills: a greater readiness to adapt efficiently to change, including technological
Dchange, to manage the public service more effectively, and to see that the taxpayer gets value for money.:
See ports 3O per cent of all that it produces. If this country is to remain a key trading nation, The size of the Civil Service at under 6OO, OOO people today is the smallest since the war. This is alreadyj industry must: emain competitive. That is one reason why the Conservative Government attaches greatsaving the taxpayer ith loneteran, formsi. blic serviF value ‘o maintaining an open multinational trading system. Another is that increased trade is a majorh We will press on with long-term management reforms in order to improve public services and reduceH way of encouraging growth and prosperity in the Third World. There ‘is little point in demanding moretheir cost..
iies and then refusing them the opportunity to trade.;.
ad we wil continue to fight for free and fair trade in international negotiations and resist the growth ofPau URE AND THE RURAL ECONOMY
Hiding to be extended to international investment, tradeBritain's farmers serve the nation well. They produce 8O per cent of thewe grow compared wit!;
_ We will press fo r Inte oa ectucl present such as patents, trade-marks and copyright. per cent only lO years ago. They have made us into the world’s sixth largest exporter of cereals when we4 " We will co tinue lO exert pressure on countries such as Japan to open up their markets and providehad been a net importer for decades before. They look after 8O per cent of the British countryside. And} hir ie freedom to trade for our exporters as they expect us to provide for theirs. consumer food prices have risen less than the cost of living, unlike the Labour years.4 t swell as creating the commercial and legal framework in which industry can flourish, the Govern-But farmers world-wide are under Pressure because of rising surpluses and the huge costs of disposing, l also ensure that the practical services on which industry and the citizen rely - transport, of them. It is just as much in the farmers’ interest as in the consumers’ and taxpayers’ that this overener research and development, and an efficient civil service ~ are provided to a high standard. production be stopped and a radical overhaul of the Common Agricultural Policy achieved, FarmersI energy, Wr’need a more sustained environment in which to plan ahead. i
FICIENT TRANSPORTWe will continue: -.. f er CIENT TR Government is proud of a record that has: to play a Jeading part in European Community Negotiations to reform the CAP;;
298299: IiCONSERVATIVE MANIFESTO:
ICONSERVATIVE MANIFESTOaa".
Farihas been spent wisely and well. The Heal _2rvice today is treating more patients than ever before in itsi to strive for even-handed and fair treatment between Member States and between the o--.¢rent regions ofhistory msy -- sa y,.. eicaion oft opt:: tally; F%loney is important, but the success of thelepends still more on the dedication oE to weet ee ly devaluation of the Green found, especially in relation to beef, working in it. There are over 75, OOO more doctors, dentists and nurses than in l978. These extra staff hve:
to upho! i: cingiity itierenabled the NHS to treat 6 million more patient cases ~ inpatients, day cases, out-patients - than wheni to reduce costs and tackle surpluses, by banging supply and de mand in the Community into bewe took office. Sometimes they work in very difficult conditions. That is why the Government hasf balance by a combination of measures including pn’reduced nurses’ basic hours from 4O to 37% hours per week and increased their pay by 3O per cent after‘
< mat ho newe pa pear eanallowing for inflation. We will continue to improve the Health Service.:
to promote competitiveness and innovation in British farming and horticulture; farmingFuture tasks for the health service‘ to give particular assistance to farmers in the Less Favoured Areas, recently extended, where farming isOur policies rest on six principles:
difficult;. First, we will give greater emphasis to the prevention of avoidable illness and the promotion of goodq to encourage better marketing of agricultural and horticultural products and to ensure that the consumerhealth - to make the NHS more truly a health service and not merely a sickness service. i has as much information about the contents of food as is necessary to make sensible choices. hichMuch progress has been made in the past eight years.
We will not introduce rating on agricultural land and will oppose two-tier pricing in the CAP, whic@ The improvement of the maternity services has helped to reduce by a third the death rate among:
would greatly disadvantage our farmers and benefit their competitors. babies in the weeks around birth.!
@ The expansion of vaccination and immunisation has prevented illness and death among Mallen byd econom@ Screening for cervical cancer has been improved and death rates from the disease haveAi
Foon al and will remain, the major industry in the countryside, and food production will continue toalmost ten per cent in the past decade.
be the farmer's basic purpose. The higher production resulting from greater efficiency and modern@ We have already embarked on a major campaign to tackle the problem of coronary heart disease. i techniques initially means more land coming out of agriculture. A new balance of policies has to© To fight AIDS, the Government has undertaken the biggest health education campaign ever seen in struck, with /ess support for expanding production of commodities already in over-supply, and morethis country ~ one much admired abroad ~ and is fully supporting the Medical Research Council in a support for diversifying into other activities.._. special programme of research towards treatments and vaccines.:
We have recognised the new needs of the countryside and tural economies in two ways. First, we nowThese are welcome advances...
place more emphasis on support for the environment and the beauty of the countryside; we now giveIn the next Parliament, we will build on this work by:!
grants to plant hedgerows, not dig them up. Second, we encourage alternative uses of land and morecompleting the network of computerised ‘call and recall’ systems for cervical cancer screening and5 diverse job opportunities to maintain thriving communities in the rural economy. extending them to younger women;;‘
We will, therefore:: developing a national programme for breast cancer screening; emphasise environmental protection and promotion of non-farming rural businesses in the planningbacking the newly established and powerful Health Education Authority.
system; oo,.. Second, we will continue to. show our support for the million people working in the NHS, of whom halfi continue to support the Development Commission in developing rural enterprises, are nurses.
extend the Environmentally Sensitive Areas scheme which makes conservation a more integral partNurses wanted the assurance that, without recourse to strike action, they would receive fair treatment of farming:; over pay. That is why we set up the independent Nurses’ Pay Review Body. After the latest award, we:
Iintroduce new schemes to assist diversification of new enterprises on farms; will have increased nurses’ pay by 3O per cent since l979, after allowing for inflation. That compares to, introduce a new Farm Woodland Scheme to assist alternative land use. the severe reduction of more than 2O per cent, which they suffered under the last Labour Government.
Nurses also want a training and career structure which reinforces their professionalism, rewards
The UK fishing industryexperience, and offers opportunities for managerial responsibility without being removed to a distant5
Our fishing industry supplies two-thirds of the fish we eat. It is an important source of jobs and income indesk. We share those views, and will seek to further them. We are particularly keen to attract experienced; many areas, oo. nurses back into the profession, and to encourage others to take up nursing as a new career. dl
The Government's success in further improving the Common Fisheries Policy has meant that_ Hospital doctors and consultants, too, are a vital part of the Health Service. We have alreadya international policies has been made more effective; and increasingly stringent conservation measuresincreased the number of consultant posts and we will continue to work for improvements in the medicalf have secured the future for our fleets. wcareer structure..;.:.;:
We will introduce legislation to ensure that UK quotas are reserved for UK fishermen. We areThe NHS could not function without ancillary services. Some of these - cleaning, catering, and pledged to measures to enable our fishermen to take full advantage of all their opportunities and tolaundry ~ have been put out to competitive tender to enable health authorities to select the best andi improve and modernise their boats. most effective way of providing these services. Savings are now approaching £lOO million a year andA.
they have gone directly and immediately into better patient care.;
Animal welfareWe have undertaken consultation on the improvement of primary care. Our aim is to develop thef°
The Conservatives have a proud record over the years of promoting animal welfare. Most of thestrength and flexibility of the services provided by GPs, dentists, pharmacists, opticians and nurses whoif legislation was either initiated by Conservative governments or introduced as Private Members’ mea-work in the community.;_. f by Conservative MPs when the Conservatives were in office. There are particular problems affecting health care in inner cities. Doctors and nurses there take on af sansinee l979 we have: particularly tough and difficult job. We shall continue to look for new ways of helping them and; e set up the Farm Animal Welfare Council which advises the Government on the welfare of farmimproving health care, especially primary care in the inner cities. a animals. We will continue to care for them with the advice and guidance of the Farm Animal Welfare__ Our third principle is to modernise the whole framework of the health service - its hospitals, its clinics,;
Council.;.. aeits equipment,.._ ithe l876 legislation with the Animals (Scientific Procedures)In the face of economic collapse, the last Labour Government cut the hospital building programme4
@ honcured the most effective in Europe It imposes tight new controls on the use of animals forby a third. This Government has embarked on the biggest building programme ever. It will cost £3 experiments. The number of experiments has declined in each of the last nine years, and we expect thatbillion. In seven years we have already carried through over 2OO major building projects from start to};; inish.; decline to continue. We will complete some l25 further major new building schemes in the next three years, and get manyi more under way. iE
Achievements In featth R CARENew hospitals, too, are ene bait He areas lacking the 3 provision rey need. oid and inefficienti
YideFee. sen eiF; Victorian building are being replaced with purpose-built modern hospitals. Much modernicine and:
The health of the British people ‘ss steadily improving. Quite simply, we live longer. Life expectancy hassurgery is better carried out'in the new larger hospitals. equipped with new medical technology. Wherev2 increased and in ah Tears ye Government has spent more on the Health Se rvice than any previouser possible, however, small old hospitals have found a new role as community hospitals staffed by local
Fran EB t bill an oc tien’s health eis sean the Conservative Oe vill spend nearly £2lFourth, elderly, disabled, mentally ill and mentally handicapped people should be cared for within the bition. After allowing for inflation, that is an increase of almost a third. This extra moneycommunity whenever this is right for them.
OO3Ol!‘ICONSERVATIVE MANIFESTOCONSERVATIVE MANIFESTO.
In the past some people who should have been cared for in other ways have CO Yned in hospitals, As a result of these reforms, mit more people will have the opportunity to take out additional°
Isometimes for years. That is changing. The number of children in long-stay hospitals for the mentallypensions of their own. In the next Parliament:;;. d handicapped has fallen by almost three-quarters. The number of adults in long-stay mental handicap and: We will reintroduce measures to give substantial tax incentives to personalpensions, and to enablei mental illness hospitals has fallen by around ll, OOO. members of occupational schemes to make additional voluntary contributions to a pension plan that is“
This changing pattern has already brought a better life to many thousands of people. It has thecompletely separate from their employers’ schemes. These measures will further increase choice for:
potential to do so for many thousands more. But we need to examine carefully various alternatives tomillions of employees.;_.
discover what is now best for patients. We have set in hand the first ever full scale review of communitySecond, to bring more help to low income families..; care. Child benefit will continue to be paid as now, and direct to the mother. Families on income support -
We will develop our policies in the light of its findings. which replaces supplementary benefit - will benefit from the new family premium. In addition, we will
Our fifth principle is to strengthen management. introduce the new family credit which will benefit twice as many low income families in work as family
The NHS is a large and complex organisation. It needs good management. It is not a business, but itincome supplement. The new system will also help tackle both the unemployment and poverty traps.} must be run in a business-like way. Third, to improve the framework of benefits for disabled people,.;
The reduction of waste and inefficiency has released hundreds of millions of pounds for better patientSpending on benefits for disabled people and those suffering long-term sickness has been increased by care. The sale of property which the NHS no longer needs - for example, because of new hospital72 per cent after inflation to £6 billion. The amount spent on mobility allowances has been doubled,:
developments - is currently raising £2OO million a year for better health care. invalid care allowance extended, the new severe disablement allowance introduced and the invalidity.
We will continue to ensure that the Health Service is as efficient as possible. trap abolished. The introduction of the new disablement premiums will bring an extra £5O million per:
But good management is not just a matter of efficiency. We value enterprise in the public service justyear to disabled people.;.:
as much as in the private sector. We will continue to encourage district and regional managers to deviseWe are carrying out a major new survey of the needs of disabled people. This will be completed nexti new ways of providing better patient care. ooyear.;;; d
Finally, the ultimate purpose of the Health Service is to serve the patient: that principle is the heart ofver to reform the tangled web of income-related benefits which has grown up piecemeal over forty nee Hele ein have to wait for treatment is the most widespread concern in the NHS. TheFor the first time all the income-related benefits will be calculated in the same way. Where people are:
Government has given priority to reducing waiting lists and times. We have set up a special £5O millionworking, the amount of benefit they get will depend on their pay after tax and national insurancei two-year programme. This year it will give treatment to over $lOO, OOO people who are waiting forrace hay ees Thus people will not be made worse off by taking a job and will not lose money when their iii, and more bone marrow transplants.
operations. We have set targets for more hip operations for old peole, PThe new rules. which come into effect in April next year, will be easier for claimants to understand:
Putting patients first was the theme of our consultative document on primary care. We want theand staff to run. In addition, our programme of computerisation - the biggest programme ever in this:
patient to have more information about services available from family doctors so that they can make acourtecusly help staff to deliver benefits to all who are entitled to them quickly, accurately andi more informed choice. Success in social policy depends on growth in national prosperity. Labour's economic failure led to
SOCIAL SECURITY - A FAIR DEAL FOR THOSE IN NEEDdamaging cuts in health care and benefits. Our increasing economic strength means that resources for‘
We are spending about £46 billion this year on social security benefits - over £8OO a year for every man, care have grown and are growing - with programmes better managed, better adapted to changing‘ woman and child in the country. Expenditure on pensions and other benefits has risen by £l3 billion ondemands, and better directed to those most in need,
Itop of inflation, since we came into office. Most of this, an extra £9 billion, has gone to provide, betteri; astandards of help and support to more elderly people, families with children, disapeople a suffering long-ierm iliness. The other £4 billion has gone to help the unemployed. But we have doneFREEDOM, LAW AND RESPONSIBILITY' more than provide extra resources - massive as the increase has been.‘onservatives have always believed that a fundamental purpose o government is to protect the securityi
For the first time for 4O years the Government has undertaken an overall review of the social securityof the citizen under the rule of law. There can be no half-heartedness, no opting out, in the fight against system. The review showed a social security system which was too complex and which too often did notcrime and violence: all of us, not just the Government or the police, share a responsibility to make safer:
provide help for those most in need. The l986 Social Security Act tackled these problems and reformedour streets and homes.
the position so that the system is simpler to understand and to run. It will be fairer in the way it directs help to those who need it most. And it will be a system in which people can look forward to independenceThe fight against crime4 and security in retirement. i. We do not underrate the challenge. Crime has been rising steadily over the years; not just in Britain, but5
Our policies for social security have four main aims... in most other countries, too. The origins of crime lie deep in society: in families where parents do not' First, to ensure that those in retirement have a secure standard of living through state provision andsupport or control their children; in schools where discipline is poor; and in the wider world whered their own pensions and savings... co.; violence is glamourised and traditional values are under attack. i
This Government has honoured its pledge to the pensioner and more than maintained the buyingGovernment alone cannot tackle such deep-rooted problems easily or quickly. But Governmenti power of the state pension. Total spending on state pensions and benefits for elderly people has risen bymust give a lead: by backing, not attacking the police; by providing a tough legal framework for
29 per cent after allowing for inflation..; sentencing; by building the prisons in which to take those who pose a threat to society -- and by keeping;
We will continue to maintain the value of the state retirement pension.; out of prison those who do not; and by encouraging local communities to prevent crime and to help thef
But retired people value their independence. They do not want to rely on the State alone for theirpolice detect it. All this we have done; and we will intensify these efforts.:
income nor, increasingly, are they doing so. We share Beveridge’s original goal of a good basic pension@ The manpower available to the police has been increased by l6,5OO since l979. i from the State, together with a second income from occupational and personal pensions and savings.@ We have given the police more powers to avert public disorder.:
Pensioners have benefitted from our success against inflation. Almost three-quarters of all pensioners@ We have encouraged tougher sentences for violent criminals. The maximum penalties for traffickingi have savings. Their income from these has grown by over seven per cent on average every year sincein hard drugs and for attempted rape have been raised to life imprisonment. The courts have been4" l979. Income from savings fell by 3% per cent every year under the last Labour Government, eaten awayempowered to strip drug traffickers of their profits. i by inflation@ We have brought forward a number of reforms to help tackle child abuse and make it more likely that8
Occupational pensions, pensioners’ savings, social security benefits and the state retirement pensionoffenders will be successfully prosecuted. i have all increased. The total increase in income for the average pensioner is more than double that@ We have embarked on the biggest prison building and modernisation programme this century, and:
achieved during the last Labour Governmentincreased staff numbers by almost a fifth.:
We are now offering new opportunities for people to obtain additional pensions from their jobs or their own savings. We have already improved the treatment of those now retiring early and of thecfor the It:
pension rights of people changing jobs,;;; are for the Innocen;;.;
We wish to encourage the ten million employees who do not yet have their own occupational pensionAt the same time we have extended protection for innocent people and for the victims of crime.:
scheme to have a pension of their own. Every employee should have the right to take out a personal@ We have strengthened the safeguards against any abuse of police power by setting up an independent:
pension, fully portable from job to job. That is why we are extending favourable tax treatment fromPolice Complaints Authority, providing for the tape-recording of police interviews and setting down employers’ schemes to personal pensions. clear rules on the proper treatment of the individual citizen.
O23O3ICONSERVATIVE MANIFESTOala. CONSERVATIVE MANIFESTOI.
iial priorihelping the victims of crime. Police treatment 6--ape victims hasWe want to see members of the ethnic..‘norities assuming positions of leadership alongside theiri:
Iwoe tade more oes More criminals’ now pay compensation to their victims. We are providingfellow citizens and accepting their full share of responsibility. Racial discrimination is an injustice andi
Oey to belp local Victim Su pport Schemes. i; can have no place in a tolerant and civilised society. We are particularly concerned about racial attacks. H.
@ We have Taunched a determined drive to improve the administration of justice by providing for time; They require effective and sympathetic attention from the police, and we have ensured that increasingly:
limits by which the cases of those held in custody must be heard. 58 more Circuit Judges have been- they receive it,;.;; ae: ppoi ted and 43 court building projects have been completed.:__, Progress towards better community relations must be on a basis of equality. Reverse discriminationq appointed,‘is itself an injustice and if it were to be introduced, it would undermine the achievement and example ofa tter justithose who had risen on their merits.‘
Better justice. oesitImmigrant communities have already shown that it is possible to play an active and influential role in:
The challenge before us remains great, but much has been done. The ee Fee ee to fiekt crimethe mainstream of British life without losing one's distinctive cultural traditions. We also want to see all‘ serious crimes of violence are brought to book. There are more police, equipethnic minorities participating fully in British culture. They will suffer permanent disadvantage if theyThose who commit serious crimes wae now expect mact tougher punishment. juced It will: remain in linguistic and cultural ghettos.‘
Early in the newiamentrimin:. inaiphaaepairs::
enable child victims of physical and sexual abuse to give evidence by a live video link in order to reduceReforming the law:
i ich they would otherwise face; we: Since the fast election the Gt hi aber of importaily law, These:
tackle, by providing for reference to the Court of Appeal, the problem of lenient senI abduction of children and the law of illegitimacy.:4 undermine public confidence in the criminal justice system, a.: IParticular laws which are not enforced or which are full of obvious anomalies risk bringing the law4 give victims of crime a statutory right to compensation under the Criminal Injuries Compensation Iitself into disrepute. Changing tastes also require the reform of out-dated laws which govern personal
Paid on our previous measures stripping drug traffickers of the proceeds of their crimes and extend theaerhe present las On Sundog Tred na eee possible. be on the basis of areal Thee are fresame approach to other serious crimes: i quently flouted. Hi
We have already signed an extradition treaty with the United States which wi make it more difficultIWe will, therefore, look for an acceptable way forward to bring sense and consistency to the law on:
for terrorists to escape British justice: now we will reform our own law on extradition so asISunday trading.-i more effective the international war against crime. And we will liberalise the laws on liquor licensing hours so as to increase consumer choice, but we will:
also keep a sensible limit on late-night opening. i
Building on strength: We have already extended absent voting rights to new categories of electors. In particular, we have{
We will lg on 8 to put a high priority on the fight against crime, so that the citizen can feel safe on theenfranchised British citizens who rane lived abroad for less than 5 years. i oneoH.; e propose to extend this eligibility.
Isre crease a he amber of police further to ensure a stronger police presence on our streets, to combatNorthern Irelandi crime and to protect the public;... iThe Britishhhhei:. A aginf offensive weapons;¢ British people have shown their commitment to the people of Northern Ireland in the common fighti strengthen he law dealing pend sale atthe oolies a ond resist pressure fom the Opposition partiesIagainst terrorism, and in helping improve the economic and social situation in the Province. We;
Imaintain t sate by letting local authorities decide policing priorities; resolutely support the security forces in their outstanding service to the whole community. f; to politicise the police by letting loca! ifessional and efficient workWe were determined that terrorism will not succeed; that the vital principles of democracy will beI continue our present prison building programme and achieve more pro’f4 huc O3desupheld; and that the people of Northern Ireland themselves should determine their constitutionalf ing practices in the prison service,. lposition;
Our aye arate a coset ae ccongy cippoed, by the general public. We will go further inWe will maintain, against Socialist Opposition, for as long as necessary the special powers which theF
Our approacby promoting crime prevention. Already more than 29, OOO Neighbourhoodpolice need throughout the UK to prevent terrorism and bring terrorists to justice.; drawing ¢ on that hae corung up since the last Election. We are committed to the success of this popularjatere will be no change in the becsent satus of Northern Ireland as part of the United Kingdomi thunless the people orm Ireland so wish iE ane will bold onthe support of the public by establishing a national organisation to promote the bestl98s th is at the heart of the Anglo-Irish sonement wnich was signed ah ihe Republic of Ireland ini hele: PR:. The Agreement offers reassurance tosides of the community that their identities and interests practices in local crime Poe rattan the apecial constabulary. I will be respected, and that any change in the status of Northern Ireland would only come about with the
We will seek ways to strengpectI consent of a majority of the people of the Province. It commits both governments to work together in the fight against terrorism. i
Tackling drug abuse..: We will continue to work within the Province for a developed government in which both communif
We have een the battle against drugs into every corner of the globe where production or trafficking. ti can have confidence and will feel able to participate. i fl i ishes. We have more than doubled the number of customs specialist drugs investigators. We haveF trengthened the effectiveness of the police in the fight against drug abuse. Traffickers can now be LOCAL GOVERNMENT AND INNER CITIES sentenced to life imprisonment. They also stand to lose all the wealth generated by their evil trade underThe Conservative view of local government is that local people should look after the interests of the local the most far-reaching asset seizure provisions anywhere in the world... community which they were elected to serve, maintaining and improving essential services at a price4
We have funded about 2OO new drug treatment facilities. Our prevention campaign, targetted onpeople can afford. That is an honourable tradition of public service, still upheld by councillors in most isk, is encouraging a strong resistance to hard drugs amongst teenagers.. local authorities, i youngsters at risk, isragingrybl;:
The battle against drugs can and must be won. Already there are some signs that the heroin problemBut the abuses of lefi-wing Labour councils have shocked the nation. The Labour Party leadershipi its peak. The cocaine explosion has never happened. It need never happen. pretends that this is a problem in only a few London boroughs. The truth is that the far Left control towni may have passed i To make the defeat of the drug trade a key priorityhalls in many of our cities. I
We will continue toie‘D5 ewThe extremists have gained power in these areas partly because too few ratepayers have an interest in:
voting for responsible councillors pursuing sensible policies. Many people benefit from local services yetiF immigre tion and races lations lowest level since control of Commonwealth immigration firstmake little or no contribution towards them: this throws too heavy a burden on too few shoulders. i beganin l962 Firm but fair immigration controls are essential for harmonious and improving commuA There is much else prong with nthe present system on domestic rates, They ‘vem unfair and volled CyI. eee. nd companies are left with little protection against huge rate rises levied by councils contro! if nity relations. istitrol over settlement becomes even more effective. Labour, Liberals and Social Democrats, which drive them out of business and destroy jobs.!
We will tighten the existing law to ensure that con::. i
We now require visas for visitors from the Indian sub-continent, Nigeria and Ghana, but to protectWe have acted to protect ratepayers’ interests in a number of ways, The wasteful and unnecessary tieri ine travellers and to guard against bogus visitors seeking to settle here illegally. We are tackling theof the GLC and metropolitan counties has been eliminated - to the substantial benefit of rate-payers. i genuinend who seek to exploit Britain’s long tradition ofOur rate-capping legislation - so bitterly opposed by the Labour, SDP and Liberal parties in Parliamenti problem of those who fraudulently pose as refugees aireaiean giving refuge to the victims of persecution.~ has protected ratepayers from huge rate increases. This year alone, twenty councils will be:
oAansICONSERVATIVE MANIFESTO’CONSERVATIVE MANIFESTO..
rate-capped ~ nineteen of them Labour and one controlled by the Liberals and the () saving rate-@ established a huge programme, costing \aOOO million, to clean up the environment of the Mersey~
Ipayers several hundred million pounds.. Basin by the early years of the next century.
We will now tackle the roots of the problem. We will reform local government finance to strengthen, We are determined to maintain the Green Belt. We will protect the countryside for its own sake andi local democracy and accountability., conserve its wildlife, while allowing for those small scale and well planned developments which arei“
Local electors must be able to decide the level of service they want and how much they are preparedneeded to provide jobs and keep country areas thriving.:; to pay for it: Whereverible we want to encoularge-scale developments to take place on unused and:
We will legislate in the first Session of the new Parliament to abolish the unfair domestic ratingneglected land in our towns and cities rather than in the countryside. We want to improve on our!
system and replace rates with a fairer Community Charge. performance in l986 when nearly half of all new development took place on reused land. I
This will be a fixed rate charge for local services paid by those over the age of l8, except the mentally il! and elderly people living in homes and hospitals. The less-well-off and students will not have to payA practical agenda:
the full charge - but everyone will be aware of the costs as well as the benefits of the local services. ThisOnly the Conservatives have a serious costed agenda for further environmental action for another five:
should encourage people to take a greater interest in the policies of their local council and getting valueyears of Government, We will::
for money. Business rate-payers will pay a Unified Business Rate at a standard rate pegged to inflation.‘continue our £6OO million programme of modifying power stations, to combat acid rain:
We will require local authorities to put out to tender a range of services, including refuse collection, adopt improved standards, in concert with Europe, for reducing pollution from cars. We have alreadyj the cleaning of streets and buildings, vehicle maintenance, catering and ground maintenance.; reduced tax on lead-free petrol and will encourage its wider use; f
Ratepayers expect councils to provide their services as efficiently as possible. Yet some local authori-introduce new laws on air pollution and dangerous wastes::
ties steadfastly oppose private sector companies tendering for services even though they could providedouble the funding for Environmentally Sensitive Areas:
them more cheaply and more effectively. The independent Audit Commission has estimated that someintroduce new laws giving extra protection to the landscape of our National Parks; i
£5OO million a year could be saved if all councils followed the practices of the best - sums which could beencourage more small woodlands in lowland areas through new grants; f used to tower rates or improve services..;..;. icgislate to safeguard common land on the basis of the Common Land Forum, and continue to protecti
The Widdicombe Report into the conduct of local authority business painted a disturbing picture ofpublic access to the countryside through footpaths; I the breakdown of democratic processes in a number of councils. We will take action to strengthensupport scientifically justified, international action to protct the atmosphere and the sea from damage democratic processes in local authorities. from pollutants;:
establish a National Rivers Authority to take over responsibilities for ensuring strict safeguards against:
Inner cities. the pollution of rivers and water courses and to pursue sound conservation policies. The water supplyi
The regeneration of the inner cities must be tackled. The growth in our national prosperity in recentand sewage functions of the water authorities will be transferred to the private sector,‘ years has been founded on a rebirth of enterprise. But ia many of our inner cities the conditions forset up safe facilities for disposing of radioactive waste from power stations, hospitals and other sources: i enterprise and pride of ownership have been systematically extinguished by Socialist councils. For the; we have aksd UK NIREX to come forward with proposals for deep disposal.; sake of those living in our inner cities we must remove the barriers against private investment, jobs andf prosperity which such councils have erected... The arts:.:.:: ql
We are setting up five new Urban Development Corporations which will have the powers, resources, Our international reputation in the arts has never been higher. Tourists flock to this country to enjoy thei and management structure to reclaim and redevelop great tracts of derelict land: these new Corporationshighest standard of theatre, music, artistic excellence and our museums. Art centres have nearly doubledi
Iwill follow the model successfully applied in London Docklands and on Merseyside.. in number since l979. Attendances at theatres, concerts, cinemas and historic houses have all riseni
Our Unified Business Rate will ensure that companies and jobs are are not driven out of inner citysignificantly.;;; j aareas by the high rates of profligate councils.-__ Under the Conservatives, spending on the arts has risen by l5 per cent since l979 after allowing for:
We have roughly doubled the resources to reclaim derelict land. We will improve procedures toinflation. Over the same period, the Arts Council grant has risen from £6l million to nearly £l39 million. i accelerate the process of bringing vacant and under-used public sector land back into productive use. And schemes like the Business Sponsorship Incentive Scheme have pushed the value of such sponsori
We will build on the experience of Urban Development Corporations by creating new mini-UDCs. ship from £' million to £25 million over the last decade. i
These will operate on a smaller scale in areas where there is clear economic potential, but where the localIn future years:;:
authorities are failing to tackle the problem.. We will maintain government support for the arts and continue to encourage private support.4
Our Urban Programme provides a range of grants to help industry and local councils undertakeWe will make it a major objective to ensure that excellence in the arts is available in all parts of the projects that will improve the environment and encourage new investment. _. countryi
We are helping to lead local action through our five City Action Teams, sixteen Inner City TaskWe will continue to safeguard our heritage. particularly through the National Heritage Memoriali
Forces and the Inner City Partnerships. All of them draw on government assistance and work with localFund, created by this Government in l98O to assist the preservation, maintenance and acquisition ofa business and local people to promote enterprise, employment and training.. items of outstanding merit which might otherwise be Jost to the nation.;; j
Great cities are built on the enterprise and vitality of the individuals who live there. Our aim is toWe will encourage our greal national museums and galleries to make the national treasures which theyf create a climate which encourage and harnesses that energy in the interest of all. house more widely accessible. i
Sport' A BETTER SOCIETYWe have increased funding for the Sports Council from £l5 million in l978/79 to £37 million in;
Planning and the environment;;, l987/88.
Conservatives are by instinct conservationists - committed to preseve all that is best of our country’sWe will continue to work with the Council and through our funding of the Sports Council National past. We are determined to maintain our national heritage of countryside and architecture. Since takingCentres, we will encourage the pursuit of excellence in our sports.} office we have:;... We want to encou'competitive sports through schools and clubs and we strongly oppose ani
@ more than doubled the area of specially protected Green Belt: we will continue to defend it againstattempts to ban competitive sports in schools. ehely¥; unsuitable development;... we: ayeWe will continue to encourage schools and colleges to open their facilities for community use wherever4:
@ established new arrangements, backed with public funds, to make farming more sensitive to wildlifepossible to cooperate with other owners to achieve public access to sport premises.
and to conservation;_..;;. Football hooliganism has tarnished the good name of British sportsmanship. We have acted to controlI
@ completed the work of listing pre-war buildings which receive legal protection and extended suchthe sale of alcohol at sports grounds. We have enhanced police powers to stop and search at football:
Protection to the best post-war buildings, grounds and we have encouraged tougher sentencing of hooligans." @ established a new, powerful Pollution Inspectorate;;
@ passed new laws on the control of pesticides and implemented new controls on the pollution of water. Broadcastingi
@ put in hand plans for cleaning up Britain's beaches, costing over £3OO million over the next four years; Our objectives for broadcasting are to provide consumers with a wider range of programmes, to encour-;
@ more than doubled spending after allowing for inflation on countryside and nature conservation sinceage independent producers, and to preserve the high standards which we have traditionally enjoyed inso l979,... British broadcasting.:
@ set in hand the establishment of the new Norfolk Broads Authority ~ a major environmentalVital decisions will need to be made in the next Parliament. We have already published proposals fora‘ initiative; less regulated and more diverse radio system. We shall follow a policy of more competition, variety and:
3O63O7: ICONSERVATIVE MANIFESTOCONSERVATIVE MANIFESTO.
Iinnovation in our domestic networks and encourage the export of British program Yo internationalWestern strength and resolution are(__ hat to achieve these aims. That is why the Conservativej.
Iaudiences and markets. The development of the broadcasting industry will be allowed to occur, wherev-Government deployed Cruise missiles. All the Opposition parties - Labour, Liberals and SDP - votedF:
er possible, commercially,;.'against deployment in the House of Commons. Yet it was the deployment of Cruise and Pershing:7
We will therefore introduce a major new Broadcasting Bill in the new Parliament. It will enable themissiles which brought the Soviet Union back to the negotiating table. We can look forward to an.
broadcasters to take full advantage of the opportunities presented by technological advances and toIagreement this year which will, for the first time, reduce the numbers of nuclear weapons..
broaden the choice of viewing and listening. With the Conservatives Britain is also taking the lead in working towards greater trust and confidence.
The broadcasters owe it to the lively talent in the independent sector to take more programmes from; between East and West, and to encourage changes in the East, where disillusion with totalitarian them.. Socialism grows inexorably. The Prime Minister's historic visit to Moscow was a major contribution to
We will ensure that at least 25 per cent of programmes broadcast on both ITV and BBC will bethis. We shall welcome any move by the Soviet Union towards respect for basic human rights. But we supplied by independent producers as soon as possible.;... must not lower our guard. Strong defence is still the surest foundation for building peace.
The responsibility for enforcing broadcasting standards must rest with the broadcasting authonies. I
The present Broadcasting Complaints Commissiona relatively narrow remit. But there isEurope grows in strength7
HO a eere orocr and more ot ex ipeanneniite n television. We will therefore bring forward'This Government has taken Britain from the sidelines into the mainstream of Europe. But being good:
S..‘antiuropeans does not prevent us from standing up for British interests. Thent we negotiated on,
We will remove the current exemption enjoyed by broadcasters under the Obscene Publications Actthe Community Budget has saved Britain £45OO million since l984agreeme:
l959. We will continue to work for strict controls on the Community Budget.:
Britain has led the way in establishing a genuine common market, with more trade and services;
BRITAIN AND THE WORLD -; o., moving freely across national boundaries *q
Britain is once again giving a lead in world affairs. We are forthright in support of freedom and justice. We will campaign for the opening of the market in financial and other services and the extension of:
We stand up vigorously for Britain's interests abroad. Our voice is heard with respect on the crucialcheaper air fares in Europe.
issues of war and peace, of finance and trade. We will also continue to work with our European partners to defend our own trading interests and:
press for freer trade among all nations.:
Defending the nationAll of this will help safeguard existing jobs and create new ones.;
The first duty of government is the defence of the reaim and the preservation of peace. Nuclear weapons; We will continue to play a responsible leading role in the development of the Community, while:
are vital to that task. In the 4O years since l945, more than lO million people have died in wars aroundsafeguarding our essential national interests. i the globe, But there has been peace in Europe.;4, not
Conventional weapons did not succeed in deterring war. But nuclear weapons have Bred to be theFirm against terrorism and aggressioni ony miffetive pea bgt conventional war in Europe as well. A strong defence policy has proved to be tBritain has stood at the forefront in the fight against international terrorism. No democracy has a better7 mos'cack.>gs‘:; inp iord than Britain in standing up to the terrorists, who threaten the most basic values of civilised life. E viin’s independent nuclear deterrent without asking anything inFeeéig upt, qii:
wet eate s policy pany oe ae the United States to withdraw its nuclear weapons from our soilWe will seek the support of other democratic nations for the provisions of the European Convention3 lose down Nato nuclear bases in Britain. It would remove Britain altogether from the protectionon the Suppression of Terrorism..: F
Iandio 5 aod States" wacker umbrella..' We stood up to aggression in the Falklands and vou do so again, i necessary. iy want normal in the defence policy followed by every British government, Labour orrelations with Argentina, We have made numerous proposals to that end. But we s! our pledges to;
Contitt Policy woud § bando World War. It policy expose us 4 nuclear blackmail from the vast Sovietthe Islanders. We will not negotiate on the sovereignty of the Falklands. i armoury, to which we would have no reply. It would inflict damage, perhaps fatal damage, on the;
Atlantic Alliance on which we and Western Europe depend for our security. It would strike at ourThe wider world relations with our most important ally, weakening the American commitment to Europe's defences. ItWhen other countries are prepared to act in good faith, the Conservative Government has shown the willt would, in short, be the biggest victory for the Soviet Union in 4O years. and the diplomatic skill to find solutions to age-old conflicts and misunderstandings. Our record of:
The defence policy of the Liberals and Social Democrats is muddled and confused. They wouldtackling longstanding problems in Hong Kong, Zimbabwe, and Gibraltar demonstrates our determ-; cancel Trident and they have no clear idea of what to put in its place. Their suggested replacements areination to seek peaceful and imaginative settlements of difficult international disputes. We have played a' much more expensive than Trident, which costs only 3p in every £ of defence spending. None would beprominent part in bringing Israel and the moderate Arab states closer to peace negotiations in the:
available in time. None would provide equal security.;. framework of an international conference.:
The Liberal and SDP defence policy would be one-sided disarmament by default or inadvertence. We believe that the issues of Southern Africa, too, will be tackled best by dialogue, not violence. We‘I
The only difference between it and Labour policy is a matter of timing. Labour would scrap Britain’swant to see an end to apartheid in South Africa. But trade and economic sanctions would only serve toi deterrent immediately upon entering office. The Liberals and Social Democrats would allow it to witherentrench apartheid, increase the risk of bloodshed, and inflict severe hardship on black South Africansi on the vine.;. without bringing a settlement any nearer. Negotiations between the leaders of the South Africanle
Only the Conservative Party stands by the defence policy which every post-war government has seenare the best vay to resolve the problems of that unhappy country. peop to be necessary and which has kept the peace of Europe for more than a generation. We are not prepared ke risks with Britain’s security..
° We will stand fully by our obligations to our European and American allies in Nato.. Overseas aid.
We will retain our independent nuclear deterrent and modernise it with Trident. Because of improveWe have the sixth largest aid programme in the western world, and the third largest in Europe, spending!
ments in Soviet defences we need a greater capability of Trident to retain the necessary deterrence whichabout £l,3OO million each year. Britain pioncered the reform of Europe’s food aid policy, to make itoo
Polaris gives. No amount of money spent on conventional defence would ever buy us the same degree of; more rapid and effective. We have substantially increased our support for the disaster, famine and:
deterrence.;. refugee relief activities of voluntary agencies, as well as for their long-term development work. We have;
We will continue to increase the effectiveness of our conventional forces, to provide them with theled the way in giving help to the people of Ethiopia, ravaged by famine. Our “Aid and Trade Provision”i most modern equipment and to obtain better value for money from the defence budget. We have alreadyfunds have helped win good development contracts for British firms worth over £2 billion since l979.\ increased defence spending by more than 2O per cent in real terms since l979 and restored the pay andWe will maintain our substantial aid programme and direct it ever more effectively. i conditions of our servicemen.. oo. We will bring more young people from Commonwealth and other countries to train and study in
But we also want to see a world in which there are fewer nuclear weapons. That is why Britain is at theBritain.:.
forefront of arms control negotiations. We ourselves have made positive and practical proposals for international action to help some of theI
We will strive with our allies to achieve balanced and verifiable agreements for. poorest and most indebted countries of sub-Saharan Africa.:
the elimination of medium-range nuclear missiles in Europe and preferably world-wide, Labour's proposal of selective import controls would damage developing countries, open the door to:
agreed constraints on shorter-range missiles; protectionism, and harm those poorest countries which most need our help. It would also be bad for:
a 5O per cent cut in strategic nuclear missiles; Britain. The best contribution Britain can make to developing countries is to champion open trade and‘ and a world-wide ban on chemical weapons. free enterprise abroad and to practise them at home.. u; CONSERVATIVE MANIFESTO
‘5i. A fateful choice a\For decades there was basic agreement between political parties on defence and foreign policy. ThatI: anagreement was firmly in the national interest. It has been torn up by our opponents.:7Labour's policy would mean not a secure Britain, but a neutralist Britain. And eventually - for there oycan be no trifling with Soviet power - a frightened and fellow-travelling Britain. The Liberals and SocialI este IDemocrats would take us more slowly down that same disastrous road.
on: IThis election matters more for our safety and freedom than any election since the Second World War. °i
TECONCLUSION: THE WAY FORWARD at IThe proposals outlined in this manifesto are the extension of policies which have already proved. ai Ioutstandingly successful.
]yToday Britain is a stable and well-governed country which exercises great influence in the world.; ookWe seek the support of the British people to make the achievement truly secure, to build upon it and
AEto extend its benefits to all.
caf f: No previous government with eight years of office to its credit has ever presented the electorate with esesuch a full programme of radical reform.
eet: No other party, presenting its manifesto proposals to the nation, has been able to support them with
NEsuch a solid record of achievement. I vd l Ai: We commend them with confidence to the British people.
kit
SweerelI:{ esaI neI ant HF i¢! I ig}
Seti3lOI
Leite ad. I