ee ernaremcenmeneaptmnentsnesintneesag Racemnsenanfst ananassae sin yp arasiramananaisirivvinmnamsstttinaneyentiinsnnen rr a aerate it et RETR RS A enI
III
I; The Labour Party Manifesto: iI
- “Britain Will Win’I
I ritain lInII
Ii(
IINTRODUCTION by Mr Neil Kinnock, leader of the Labour PartyfI
Every election is a time of decision. But this General Election on June ll faces the British people with! choices more sharp than at any time in the past fifty years.; i iThe choices are between Labour's programme of work for people and Tory policies of waste ofd people: between investment in industrial strength, and acceptance of industrial decline; between a;
‘Britain with competitive, modern industries. and a Britain with a low tech, low paid, low securityI
C conomy increasingly dependent upon imports.4; The election will decide whether we and our children are to live in a country that builds high:: standards of care for all who need treatment for illness, pensions in retirement, good grounding in§ education, fair chances to get on; or in a country where the Conservatives go on running down the vital: I thealth, education and social services of every community, imposing higher charges and lower standards. f
This election will decide whether our country is to be a United Kingdom or a divided kingdom; oneq that is brought together by proper provision, prudent investment and concern for the interests of theI whole nation, or one that is pulled apart by poverty, cuts, increased privilege for the richest and neglectI for the rest.+
IThis election will decide whether we put our resources into the real defence provided by a modern, f
‘well-equipped army, navy and airforce safeguarding our country and supporting Nato; or spend thosei isums on maintaining an ageing system of nuclear weapons, while buying a new generation of missiles:
iwhich cannot give our country effective defence. It will decide whether Britain is part of the international: process of nuclear build-down or ruled by a government uniquely intent upon nuclear buildup.: We already know what a third term for Mrs Thatcher would mean for the people of Britain.:
IUnder the Tories there have been:
@ Eight years of record unemployment, relentless industrial closures and redundancies, of floodingf imports and shrunken investment. H
@ Eight years of the highest ever tax burden on the family and the nation as VAT, National Insurance, qI rates and fees have all been put up in a shift to taxes on spending and employment. A i@ Eight years of cuts and closures and charges, of intensified means tests and reduced services. i
I@ Eight years of increased state control, of centralising government, of abolition of rights of representaf ition and negotiation. i
@ Eight years of rising crime, of greater insecurity on the streets and housing estates and in the home. HI
I@ Eight years of meanness towards the needy in our country and towards the wretched of the world. HI
@ Eight years of growing division - in health, in opportunity, in housing conditions, in work and inj' income - between regions, communities, classes, families, white and black, rich and poor. i
~The Tories say they are “proud of their record”. So proud indeed that they would want to do more of
C jhe same if they were reelected.
© ‘Their plans for a poll tax would penalise millions of families, pensioners and young people. Their refusal to provide the resources needed for the Health Service and their plans for imposing further payment and privatisation will hit everyone in the service and everyone needing to use it. i;
They would, if they won power again, privatise water, electricity, steel and other services, andI industries built up by public investment over past years. They want to impose penal increases in rents forI private and public tenants. They are committed to introducing compulsory labour for young unemployed people. I
All this and worse would come with a third term of Tory government. Britain cannot afford more of that run-down, sell-off and splitup, nor all the costs and waste that they bring. Britain does not have to.{I
Britain can stop the rot - but only by voting Labour. There is no other way to prevent thirteen years ofiI
Thatcherism. I
No party other than Labour can possibly win enough seats to form a government. The Liberals andI
SDP know that. Their hope is to profit from confusion. To divide the non-Conservative vote in such aH way as to make them the “hook” in a “hung” Parliament and have power far beyond their responsibility.{PI
And, while one of their leaders clearly favours an arrangement to sustain a Conservative government,; I the other hasn‘t the strength to stop him. That offers no way ahead for a nation that needs to get on withi investing for change, for quality, for confidence in the future.\I
Proper support for education, strengthened research and development and long-term, low interestiI finance for industrial growth are all essential if Britain is to gain the vitality necessary to outpacei competitors who have been building these assets for years. I
They are essential, too, if we are to generate the wealth needed for the security, care and opportunity fundamental to the individual freedom of women and men of all ages and origins. When our country faces the common pressures on the environment, the common dangers of crime, the common costs of
3llII
I; III
}:. I inenoedenenenannanaanansntanmecanneneatieaanne sean eee einneiemenmeapneneinnemensinenncianiincapianenaa nan ee A TS CLAN TSLABOUR MANIFESTOCYr~LABOUR MANIFESTO ay,(J unemployment, under-investment and under-performance together, our country has every commonwhichever is the most favourabh; Wie wi: a.,; sense veavon to meet those challenges t ogetheraniined; newtionersfavourable to pensioners. We will begin the abolition of the TV licence fee forI7
That is democratic socialism in action. An just as a family uses its com ined spirit and resources toWe will provide pensioners on supplementary be! ii;; overcome crisis, so Britain can once again make common cause to achteve common good. premium to help with fuel bills. We wall begin Wiscusionsatt the. fuel industries with: wile ies ha sing
Only a Labour government can give that lead. Only we are committed to such concerted action. Onlyout standing charges. a view to phasingi we believe that the whole nation should win and can win. We will fully restore the State Earnin:{ i> Whole natinWillrgs Related Pension Scheme as part of the process of achievii
That is why Britain will win, with Labour. our objective of a pensions level of one-third average earnings for single people and half rege oranes:
for married couples.8i
I BRITAIN WILL WIN ange. Only a Laboscan bring it about, Mending divisiWe will restore and increase the death grant. d ritain is crying out for change. yaur government can bring it about. Mending divisions, e will increase child benefit by £3 a week for all chii:
building new strengths will need determination and realistic priorities. Commonsense and the commonIand increase one-parent family benefit by £2.2O. F all children, raise the allowance to the first by £7.36i interest require that the Tory philosophy of selfishness and short-term gain is replaced by the democraticWe will restore and increase the maternity granti socialist philosophy of community and caring, of investment in people and in production.; We will start to phase in a new disability income scheme and proviii7”
‘We must as a priority tackle the immediate tragedy and waste of unemployment. We must commitsupport to young people with disabilities. Our special Minister for the Disabled will be mt in charge of resources to modernising and strengthening the industries and services that earn Britain a living. We, our programme for the disabled. puFEE O:
must ensure the continuity of expansion that is necessary for a lasting economic recovery. That is ourIWe will extend the long-term supplementary benefit rate to the long-term unemployed.
Strategy. I. L,.. We will implement a comprehensive strategy for ending lowintroductii
It begins from the understanding that people are Britain’s most precious resource. It is rooted and inI statutory national minimum wage. This will be of particular benefit ts ne a Rah ei ir ae the confidence that, with the right skills, the right equipment and the backing of a government that isfamilies out of poverty. iseip hii committed to encouraging enterprise and innovation, Britain's people can make our country more: i efficient, more competitive and more socially just. It is a message of hope and confidence - the’ THE ANTI-CRIME PR alternative to the divisive and dictatorial approach of the Conservatives.; We will introduce crime tOGRAMME home-owners and tenantsi
We do not believe that everything could or should be done by government. But we know, from ourWe will work with the police to get more police on the beat. Uniformed police officers will be relieved pa history bad from the eximple set by our competitors, that national economic success cannot beof non-law-and-order tasks which take them away from crime prevention, pursuit and detection, mi achieved Wi.. eeWe will reverse thiim criminal injuriI
_ Britain will win with a Labour government that invests to enable people to use their abilities and toWe will give the Chie! Iejenice Cees rise who can gain criminal at heed compensation.
stimulate modern training, research, development, production and marketing. These are the ingredientsqueue awaiting compensation‘O cut the all-time record 64, OOO; of economic vitality, and the foundations of fairness.°I
PAYING FOR THE RECOVERY PROGRAMME
THE PRIORITY PROGRAMME..; These immediate programmes will cost £6 billion a year net for the first two years.:
For our first two years in government we will concentrate resources on the essential tasks of combatingWe will pay for them by:. f unemployment and poverty. In the course of that action, we will strengthen the health, housing,© Putting directly intotiji
I education, social services and crime-fighting services that are vital to social and economic well-being, government on ite 2p Sneome abba Jobs the money that would be used up by the Thatcheri and begin to rebuild our manufacturing industry.@ Adopting the same practice as' cessful i:.: I
Clearly, all other programmes that require substantial public finance must take lower priority inborrowing £3 billion for useful wealth enerating naonal iavecwent and companies, by prudently terms of timescale and public resources. We will reverse the extra tax cuts which the richest 5 per cent have received from the Tory governmenti and allocate that money instead to the most needy. We will also bring forward other reforms to capital
THE JOBS PROGRAMMEtaxation - including the introduction of a wealth tax, which, whilst applying to only the wealthiest one
Immediately after the election the Labour Government will call together a National Economic Summitper cent of the population, will, over the years, bring a significant contribution from those in our societ to assess fully the condition of the economy and set the recovery programme in motion - producing thebest able to pay. y jobs that need to be done by people who need to do them in a country that wants them done. i
The Summit will establish the first stage of the National Economic Assessment. This will identify theCHANGES WITHOUT CHARGESH concerted action that will need to be taken by government, employers in the private and public sectorsApart from legislating where necessary for the Recovery PrograiiI) swi and trade unions to increase investment contain inflation and achieve sustained recovery.: enact many other worthwhile measures. These will cost little O Tepleneat Bat a pistols le wiluce unemployment by one million in two years as the first instalment in beating massimprovement in the quality of administration, isiFNei unemployment. They will include: ion, provision and response to the needs of ordinary citizens.:
I Half a million jobs will be generated in private industry and in the public sector by the repairing and@ A Minister for Women, with a place in the Cabinet.
building of the houses, the hospitals and schools, the transport improvements and sewers that the nation@ A Freedom of Information Act, to be accoied bi;_ needs. This will be achieved by public investment and by reducing employers’ National InsuranceAct. mpanied by the repeal of Section Two of the Official Secrets:
contribution in targeted areas.@ Parliamentary scrutiny of the Security Services.:
Another 36O, OOO new jobs and training places will be created. These will provide new skills for young@ Appointment of an Education Ombudsmani people and d adults one proper opport tunities for women. 4 educati; d the neglectedbd Appointment of an Ombudsman for Police Complaints. H furt!. OOO new jobs will improve the health an ucation services and the neglectn Energy Efficiency Agency to coordij::.:
community and caring services. The depleted customs services will be strengthened in the fight againstenergy users. Cy Agency to coordinate conservation programmes for domestic and industrial:
drugs. The revenue and benefit departments will be staffed to increase efficiency.@ A new Ministry of Environmental Protection. iF
We will extend the voluntary Job Release Scheme to men over 6O so that those who want to retirei, early vacate jobs for those who are currently unemployed. This could take as many as l6O, OOO people outPROGRAMME FOR A FIVE-YEAR PARLIAMENT of unemployment and into work. gabour’s Programme for Recovery will be the start ofa strategy for a full Parliament. We have to halt the ufacturing industry, not only to generate jobs and increase our world trade share bu’‘
THE ANTI-POVERTY PROGRAMME;;; create the wealth to finance the rescue and expansion of education, health, housing and the vociali
The spread of poverty in the past eight years has stained the whole nation, and widened misery andservices,, iF disadvantage amongst old and young. Much of it is the result of deliberate government policies. MillionsI of poor people endure it in despair. Millions who are not poor regard it as a disgrace. The LabourNEW STRENGTH FOR INDUSTRY:
BOM ewilli will combat poverty cirvetly,.£4‘on f. For eight years British industry has been left to drift and decline. Our oil revenues have been wasted and/
‘e will immediately increase the single pension by £5. a week and the pension for a married couple bythe City has concentrated upon short-term movements of capital at the expense of BritishfennH
£8, as the first step in reestablishing a link between pensions and average earnings or living costs, industry. The huge capital outflow of £llO billion since l979 is ruinous evidence of the Tories’ lack ofI l2atiILABOUR MANIFESTOILABOUR MANIFESTO concern for the strength of the British economy. LYITo give Britain's producers the backing they:_Al, the burden of agricultural support must be shiftedi
Labour is committed to rebuilding our industrial base. Our country must make the best use offrom consumers. The direction of Support must be shifted away from blanket support for commodities,:> computers and information technology to develop the modern means of making a living as the oil runstowards helping the farmers who need it most, such as those who work in the hills or on marginal land.4 down and the pressures of technical change and international competition intensify. To help bring this about we will introduce new, long-term programmes for agriculture. q
We will:;.; We will also help new farmers and young farmers by offering farms to rent. And we will reverse the:
© Establish a capital repatriation scheme using the tax system to attract and retain British savings andcuts in the Agricultural Development and Advisory Service and research. d
Peace an vieh Industrial Investment Bank, with strong bases in Scotland, Wales and EnglishFREEDOM AND FAIRNESS FOR ALL BRITAIN’S PEOPLE regions, to ensure finance for industry where it is needed, when it is needed and on terms whichWe are determined to make Britain a fairer and freer society.:
encourage long term development.; To us and to the majority of the British people a civilised community is one in which citizens bandy
@ Implement a dynamic and properly funded regional policy. This will include the establishment oftogether to provide, out of community resources to which ail contribute, essential services like health,;
Regional Development Agencies (starting with the North, North-West, Yorkshire and Humberside), theeducation and pensions that the great majority of people can not afford to provide for themselves at time promotion of local and regional enterprise boards; greater scope for local authorities to participateof need..
constructively in economic development; and creating high technology innovation centres throughoutI_ When the Tories talk of freedom, they mean freedom for the few, for those who can afford to buyl
Britain._; handpravilege. What they mean. as their record so plainly shows, is more tax cuts for the rich and less help for inistry of Science and Technology to promote a major increase in research aneand for the great majority who are neither rich nor poor.{.
seocmroe eamipneth mon inate the activities and budgets of government departments involved in theseLabour's objective is to broaden and deepen the liberty of ail individuats in our community; to free7:
areas and will encourage, in conjunction with industry and the scientific community, the full applicationpeople from poverty, exploitation and fear, to free them to realise their full potential; to see that everyoneq of science to industrialand products.; has the liberty to enjoy real chances, to make real choices. d
@ We shall extend social ownership by a variety of means, as set out in Labour's detailed proposals. InIt means collective provision for private use. The British people know that this is the most effectiveq particular, we will set up British Enterprise, to take a socially owned stake in high-tech industries andway for them to secure their freedom as individuals whilst meeting the moral obligations which they feel:
other concerns where public funds are used to strengthen investment. atowards others and seeing that fairness is a way of national life, not just a fine word.{
Social ownership of basic utilities like gas and water is vital to ensure that every individual has accessThese values are the essence of our democratic socialism.:
ir use and that the companies contribute to Britain's industrial recovery, for instance, by buying
Bash, We shall start by using the existing 49 per cent holding in British Telecom to ensure properI INVESTING IN HEALTH;; influence in their decisions. Private shares in BT and British Gas will be converted into special newLabour's proudest achievement is the creation of the National Health Service. The Conservatives votedi securities. These will be bought and sold in the market in the usual way and will carry either a guaranteedagainst it then. All who use and value the service know only too well how it has been neglected andi return, or dividends linked to the company’s growth. downgraded by today’s Tories
@ Encourage the establishment and success of cooperatives of all forms..;; Labour will establish the NHS in its rightful place as a high quality service for the prevention and!
© Strengthen the Department of Trade and Industry as the spearhead of this new national industrial_ _ treatment of illness, free at the time of use to all who heed attention, equipped to meet the changingi strategy. he C+ Lond4prevision of nes i“ they late, for instance, joan ageing population and the requirements of propers ing iframework to ensure honest practice in the City of London an; JOi)i. i i Bring in a stronger regulatorytakeovers and monopolies lO protect our national industrial, The biggest single deficiency in the NHS today is the excessively high hospital waiting lists which, i
I technological and research and development interests. under the Tories, are increasing year by year. We shall speedily reduce them by computerising bed4 i allocation, encouraging more consultants to work full-time for the NHS and targeting increased reA
IPLAN FOR TRAINING.‘sources where waiting lists remain excessive.4
For modern, wealth-creating industry we need a well-trained workforce. British industry now carries outThe basis of the NHS is the Famity Doctor Service. We shall act to improve it, with shorter GPfl
Jess than half of the training of our main competitors. Labour will therefore establish a national trainingpatient lists, more convenient surgery hours, more choice and information for patients, We will develop4 programme to bring about a major advance in the spread and standard of skills.. locat family health care teams and more local health centres. t
For young people we will establish an integrated, high quality Foundation Programme that willWomen’s health care has been seriously neglected. Our Charter for Womens’ Health will include a; guarantee for all l6 year olds at feast two years of education, training and work experience according tonetwork of Well-Women Clinics, and a computerised call and recall screening system as a universalE their needs. service for all women at risk of cervical and breast cancer. We shall see that all women have the chance to:
The Adult Skillpian will develop lifelong training and education for everyone needing to supplementI see a woman doctor if they choose.; and update skills in work, with particular emphasis given to training for women. We will step up the fight against AIDS by increasing research resources to find a vaccine or cure andi
The Jobs, Enterprise and Training Programme will expand existing programmes for unemployedalso ensure adequate resources for the supply of drugs capable of arresting the affliction.‘ people with a guarantee of a job or new skill for the long-term unemployed. iWe will improve outpatient and emergency facilities and ambulance services and repair and buildi
I hospitals. We intend to improve both the quantity and quality of services for the National Health. Thei
A SENSIBLE ENERGY POLICY;; ITories have increased prescription charges twelve fold. We will begin to reduce them with the purpose of[
Efficiency in industry and security in the community both depend on reliable and safe supplies of energyIsecuring their eventual abolition.; available at acceptable cost. Britain’s oil reserves have a limited life. We have huge reserves of coal which: Labour will ensure that nurses get proper and justified pay increases by right and regularly, notji will last for centuries. Labour’s coordinated energy programme will ensure the most sensible use of ourexceptionally as pre-election sweetners. Other hospital staff, on whom the effective running of the serviceI es while protecting our environment and stimulating employment.. depends, must also be fairly rewarded as part of the effective health team.
Labour will initiate a major energy conservation programme and ensure that Britain develops the fullPrivatisation means a Health Service run for profit rather than in the patients’ interests. Labour will; potential of its coal, oil and gas resources, whilst gradually diminishing Britain’s dependence uponend privatisation in the NHS, relieve the pressure on NHS facilities by beginning to phase out pay bedsi nuclear energy. and remove public subsidies to private health.é
We will invest substantially in research into, and development of, the renewable energy resources as part of the alternative means of power. A CARING COMMUNITY
We will not proceed with the building of the proposed Pressurised Water Reactor at Sizewell.. The quality of life of the elderly and of disabled people can and must be improved by community{
We share national concern about the problem of nuclear waste. We will ensure a safe future for' services. We believe that retirement should be comfortable and interesting - a time of freedom andi
Sellafield and develop a new strategy for the monitoring, storage and disposal of nuclear waste. choice, not anxiety and loneliness. We believe that disability should not be a disqualification from good;
Labour will take effective steps to improve the service provided by the energy industry to energystandards of living and liberty.;:
consumers. These will cover quality of supply, frequency of metering, general service arrangements andLa Aer from our commiment to higher pensions and the beginning of a new disablement allowance,:
bahe disabled, those in poverty and others with special needs. ur will support the National Health Service and local government in providing more meals on proper provision for tpovertywheels, home helps, chiropody services and health visitors.. pe5:
A PROSPEROUS AGRICULTURE. io, We also recognise the immense contribution of the three million people - mostly women - who care
A more efficient agricultural industry can clearly make a valuable contribution to Britain's recovery. Wefor their elderly, infirm and disabled relatives at home. They save the community huge sums of money,:
will support good environmental practices in agriculture. often at considerable sacrifice to themselves. The Labour government will consequently provide a
3l43l5: LABOUR MANIFESTOarNLABOUR MANIFESTO carer’s allowance to give extra help to those who serve their loved ones and our society so well. hite and fire the managing agents in block of Wats. They will be empowered to have the freeholder’s.
We appreciate and will support voluntary efforts that supplement services which are essential to theaccounts examined by an auditor of their choice and be given the legal right to extend their lease.45 community. We share the view of many who are engaged in such efforts that they achieve best resultsSecurity of tenure will be protected for private tenants. These tenants will be given a legal right to get:
working in the context of high quality public provision. tepairs done.:
EDUCATION FOR BRITAIN’S FUTUREPROTECTING OUR PEOPLE
Our children are our future. We have a moral and material duty to see that children and young people areThe Thatcher government has broken its promises on law and order. Last year 4,3ll, OOO crimes were:
fully equipped to deal with the complexities and challenges which face them now and which they willcommitted in Britain. The clearup rate fell to 32 per cent. Millions of women are scared to go out atd meet as citizens; parents and workers in the future. night. Many old people lock themselves into their homes. Drug trafficking is increasing. i
They must be provided with a system of education that enables them to control that future. We mustLabour will take urgent action to make peopie safer. Our crime prevention programme will::
see that it is democratic and just, that it is creative and compassionate, and that it is one in which they@ Help local councils to implement a Safer Streets policy, with more street-lighting, more caretakers, can fully exploit the advantages of science and technology with confidence and in safety. park-keepers and other public employees whose presence deters crime.:
In pursuit of those objectives, Labour will invest in education so that the abilities of all children and@ Bring ina Safe Estates Policy, assisting councils to provide stronger locks, stouter doors and vandali adults from all home backgrounds and in every part of our country are discovered and nourished. Iproof windows for tenants and home-owners - especially older citizens - who have difficulty in meetingi
We will make nursery education available for all three-and four-year-olds whose parents want thisthe costs of such security improvements.
opportunity. We will make provision for smaller classes and ensure that children have upto-date books,@ Introduce a Safer Transport policy, to protect passengers and crews, including better services, especial-:
equipment and buildings without having to depend on fund-raising for those essentials.. ly at night, adequate staffing, better sited bus stops and well-lit stations with alarm buttons.
The entitlement to free school meals and the restoration of nutritional standards are, like the@ Lay down crime prevention standards for buildings, open spaces and vehicles to combat vandalism;:
strengthening of ine school health service, commitments which are necessary to safeguard the physicaland to deter criminals. i and social wellbeing of growing chikiren...;@ Combat violence against women - specially domestic violence - by seeing that the laws that already:
We will see that teachers are recognised properly as well qualified professionals, in their systems ofexist against beating and abuse are vigorously enforced. d rewards, in the procedures for negotiation of their employment conditions and in participation in theOur victim support programme will fund a national network of victim support schemes, providingi development of education.;. I practical help to victims of all crime, ranging from victims of rape and child abuse to mugging andl
In addition we shall work with local education authorities to secure a flexible but clear core curricu-iburglary victims. i lum agreed at national level, a Schoo! Standards Council, and a new profile of achievement recordingWe shall assist family and support groups in their efforts to work with professionals in the health,; individual progress through school for all pupils. We will improve links between schools and home soeducation and other services and within the community to deal with the great and growing problem ofql that parents and teachers act in partnership to foster the best interests of children. drug abuse. i
We shall foster achievement with other policies such as providing proper funding for the GCSELocally elected police authorities will be given clear statutory responsibility with the police to enforce,' curriculum and examination, for improved supply of teachers and equipment for science subjects so thatthe law and uphold the Queen’s peace. The police themselves will remain responsible for all operationalt girls as well as boys increase science learning. There will be maintenance allowances for l6 to l8year-matters.
olds whose family circumstances would otherwise impede their further education..: Fraud in the City of London is a serious crime. Too many get away with it. Labour will bring in§
We will spread the provision of a comprehensive tertiary system of post-schoo! education. -effective regulation by establishing an independent statutory commission.4
These policies will all contribute to raising standards of performance in schools. At the same time as( we improve the quality of publicly provided education, we shall end the!'l plus everywhere and stop theMAKING TRAVEL EASIERi diverting of precious resources that occurs through the Assisted Places Scheme and the public subsidiesEfficient, inexpensive public transport is essential in any society. Tory policies have made travel morei lO private schools.;;. difficult by cutting services and pushing up fares. Deregulation of buses has brought chaos to many partsf
ILabour values the research and teaching contribution made by Britain’s higher education system. Weof the country both in towns and cities and in the rural areas where efficient and cheap public transport is‘ will ensure that our universities and polytechnics get the resources they need to restore and expand theso important. -i opportunity for all qualified young people secking higher education to secure places. We will ensure thatLabour will invest to coordinate and improve bus and rail services, which will improve travel andfl more adults have access to higher education to give them the “second chance” of personal development. reduce congestion. There will be Local Transport Pians for every area.3
We will also invest in research in higher education, in order to provide the facilities and opportunitiesAction will be taken to keep fares down. There will be good concessionary fare schemes for locali necessary to sustain standards of excellence, to retain and attract the highest talents and to encourage thetravel for pensioners and people with disabilities. i industrial and commercial application of research output.; We shall promote services for those with special needs, such as diala-ride and taxicard schemesi
Education for life through a well-funded adult education services will help to provide the means byoffering cheap travel for the disabled. i which rapid economic and social change can be embraced. We shall invest to ensure a continuing future for British Rail Engineering as high quality supplier4 both for British Rail and to world markets. i
REAL CHOICE IN HOUSING
Public funding for housing has fallen by 6O per cent during Mrs Thatcher's eight years in office. Far fewerA SAFER ENVIRONMENT‘ homes are being built. Millions of dwellings are in serious disrepair. Yet there is record unemploymentThe countryside and the urban areas all suffer from pollution and the misuse of the environment. Labourf among building workers. This policy is immoral and grossly inefficient. Labour will reverse it. We willwill establish a Ministry of Environmental Protection to take positive action to safeguard the quality and:, also improve the quality of housing workmanship and establish a new system of registration in thesafety of life. We will: l; construction industry.:;;;;@ Set up an Environmental Protection Service and a Wildlife and Countryside Service.
We will launch a major housebuilding and public and private sector housing renovation drive as part@ Extend the planning system to cover agricultural forestry and water developments requiring them, andI of our jobs programme and to combat the problems of bad housing, overcrowding and homelessness, industry, to take account of environmental considerations. i
Owner-occupiers will benefit from increased availability of improvement grants. _@ Invest more in land reclamation and cleaning up, in recycling and conservation, in development of
We will maintain mortgage tax relief, at the standard rate of income tax. To assist house-purchasersnew products, processes and pollution control equipment. This will not only make the country cleaneri we will introduce a housing “log book”, giving each dwelling’s history, condition and construction sobut will create jobs as well. F that purchasers will know exactly what they are buying. This will be transferred with the sale.@ Take action to deal with acid rain. I
For council tenants, we will maintain the right to buy. Local authorities, at present limited by the@ Stop radio-active discharges into our seas and oppose the dumping of nuclear waste at sea. i
Tories in using the receipts from council house sales, will be required to use these proceeds to invest in@ Provide for better monitoring, inspection and enforcement of pollution control, to cover areas rangingi new housing. For the millions who choose to remain council tenants, we will give a legal right to befrom air pollution to beaches, from hazardous chemicals to food additives, and from water quality tof consulted about rents, charges, repair and improvement programmes. Tenants’ associations will bevehicle emissions. d given representation in the decision-making structure and a say in spending budgets on their estates.@ Protect green belts and other specially designated areas.‘
Groups of tenants who want to take over the running of their homes will have the right to set up@ Bring in a new Wildlife and Countryside Act and provide for public access to all common landi management cooperatives.;.;. o, mountain, moor and heath.:4
Leaseholders who own their homes will be given the legal right to acquire their freeholds at fair prices@ End all forms of organised hunting with hounds. Special account will be taken of the conditions\ and without the costly current impediments to that right. Leaseholders in flats will get the legal right toapplying in National Parks. These changes will not affect shooting and fishing.4
3l63l7!' LABOUR MANIFE:
LABOUR MANIFESTOe@e‘STOi
@ Update animal protection legislation - for example, to eliminate unnecessary experimenting on live__ Labour's approach will be to develop the partnership between central and local government, with the_ animals. direct participation of the voluntary and private sectors. We will:..
e Give local authorities in key areas the power to declare Public Action Zones. in these areas, locali
DEMOCRACYcouncils will have additional resources and powers to undertake programmes of investment. Land will;
STRENGTHENING O parliamentary democracy and introduce state aid for political parties, alongbe identified for housing, jobs and amenities and extra government resources allocated to help with the lines of the Houghton Report. comprehensive regeneration. Local people will be fully consulted about their needs and ideas.‘
IWe shall establish a new democractically elected strategic authority for London and consult ¥ widelybd Strengthen I evn Progra amme and fartnersh ips Schemes.; iistructinistration in England and Wales. needs. i labout the most effective regionalure of government and administ@ Increase resources for reclaiming derelict land.:
TLAND opel legislate in the first Parliamentary session to establish a democratically-elected Scottish Assem-RURAL AREAS:
bly in Edinburgh. This will have a wide range of powers over health, education and housing and overUnder the Tories, the problems of the rural areas have become steadily more serious - the lack of jobs,:
significant aspects of industrial and economic policy. It will take responsibility for changes in thethe poor housing, and the loss of buses, post offices, shops and schools.§ structure of Scottish local government. ILabour will give our rural communities the chance to thrive again. Our policies include better public:
transport, new mobile facilities for health care and social services - and extra help to keep open localj
WALESschools and post offices.:
Wales and the Welsh economy will clearly benefit from Labour's programme for investment in jobs andI:
vital services. In addition, the Welsh Development Agency will be given greater powers and funds-and I ~~ ENHANCING RIGHTS, INCREASING FREEDOM there will be a new Wales Economic Planning Council. Welsh agriculture will benefit from our measuresI Under the Conservatives, Britain has become a harsher place. Freedoms built up over generations have:
to help the livestock farmers - especially the marginal and hill farmers.. I been weakened or removed. Labour will restore and enhance those freedoms in a Britain where life can
A separate Arts Council for Wales will be established and the development of the use and choice ofI be more pleasant and fulfilling,!
the Welsh language will be encouraged. We believe that positive steps are needed to help women and ethnic minorities get a fair deal, and toi: attain more democracy in the workplace. In addition, we will take steps to ensure that homosexuals areq
NORTHERN [RELAND. not discriminated against. i
Labour's policies for economic renewal are essential to combat the record unemployment and social deprivation in Northern Ireland and to encourage the economic security which is fundamental to theWOMEN’S RIGHTS development of harmony and trust in the community.;. MhIf of Britain’,. wae:
We believe in a united Ireland: to be achieved peacefully, democratically, and by consent. Welore than half of Britain's people - the women of our country ~ are still denied many essential rights. i consequently support the Angto-Irish Agreement and its commitment that there should be no change in_ _ Labour’s Ministry for Women will make sure that, in framing their policies, all government departments the constitutional position of Northern Ireland without the consent of the majority of the people whoI listen and respond to women’s needs and concerns.;.§ live there. No group or party will be allowed to exercise a veto on political development, or on policiesI! n particular, women must have the right to work and equal rights at work. In addition to our new:
designed to win consent. provision for training opportunities and protection against discrimination, Labour will help the largeA.
We will combat para-military violence from wherever it comes. We will promote discussions aimednumber of women who are part-time workers. We will legislate for them to have the same hourly rates, i
‘ote a gtAf. ive iiti! rights to sick pay, paid holidays and job security as full-time workers. i at encouraging mutual confidence and eliminating conflict whilst ensuring that the respective identities: SICKlK. fr and basic rights of both communities will be protected. We will replace present strip-searching practice_- We will give pomeworkers the status and rights of employees: introduce effective laws for equal pay:
with more effective and acceptable security measures.: shorter, a ore flexibl ¢ working. eNaiitedave for parents when their child is born; and encourage a;
LOCAL DEMOCRACY;
The Tory government has undermined local democracy and plans to continue to diminish the impor-DEMOCRACY IN THE WORKPLACE. q tance of votes in local elections,;;. Workers’ rights have been eroded, or in some cases removed entirely, during the Thatcher years.4
It has made huge cuts in rate support grant and imposed financial penalties to prevent councilsLabour's policy for new rights and responsibilities means legislation to foster good industrial relationsA maintaining and improving the quality of essential local services. Employment, and sensible and sensi-and democratic participation in industry and trade unions. We believe that the law should be used to4 tive investment in local communities and their services, have been damaged.. enlarge, not diminish, the freedom of workers to contro! their environment. We will:
Labour will restore the right of councils to decide their own policies and plans, which will be subject@ Replace Tory legislation that gives employers and non-unionists the means to frustrate legitimatef to the decisions of local people at annual local elections. I trade union activity. New laws will strengthen the legal right rights of representation, bargaining andI
We will halt the cuts in rate support grant and end financial penalties. We will make the legal; trade unionism that are essential in a modern democracy..
liabilities of councillors similar to those of Ministers and Company Directors by ending surcharge andI @ Improve the protection available against unfair dismissal. We shall make the legislation apply from disqualification except for criminal offences.;; the time of employment. Reinstatement will be the normal outcome of a successful finding of unfair
We will abolish the Rates Act and repeal the legislation which established the poll tax in Scotland.' treatment. We will ensure that justice is done in cases where miners have been unfairly dismissed.
We will give local authorities the necessary powers to enable them to build on existing successful@ Extend employment protection to all workers, including part-timers. H initiatives for enterprise and employment, to develop new technologies and to train young people.@ Improve statutory protection in respect of health and safety at work. i
Labour will examine the structure of local government to ensure that it is democratic and effective.@ Restore provision for fair pay, such as the Fair Wages Resolution, Schedule ll of the l975 EmployWe will establish a new Quality Commission to ensure the spread of “best practice”, efficiency and highment Protection Act and the powers of the Wages Council. f standards of local authority provision and response to the public.@ Strengthen ACAS to put more emphasis on conciliation and arbitration. H i @ Take steps to develop stable and effective negotiating machinery, promote trade union membership;
NEW LIFE FOR INNER CITIESI and organisation, and encourage union recognition by employers.. i
Except where it has turned areas over to speculators so that they can create luxury accommodation at@ Restore the right to belong to a trade union to every employee - including those at GCHQ.
astronomical prices, this government has left inner-city areas to rot.' @ Ensure that the law guarantees the essential legal freedom of workers and their unions to organise
Experience has shown that the Conservatives’ City Action Teams have never had the means or theeffective industrial action. i purpose of making any real impact on inner city problems.@ Provide a statutory framework of measures to underpin the participative rights of union members, forI
Tory cuts in funding and in housing, together with mass unemployment, have turned too many of ourexample by laying down general principles for inclusion in union rule books. These will be based on aI urban areas into dingy, hopeless places. right for union members to have a secret ballot on decisions relating to strikes, and for the method ofi
Yet the people who live there, given the chance, have the zest and initiative to make these areas thriveelection of union executives to be based on a system of secret ballots.!. socially and economically.@ In consultation with the TUC, we will establish new independent tribunal, presided over by a legatly-:
Labour will launch a drive against inner-city deprivation both as a way of generating employmentqualified person. This will have the duty of acting on complaints by union members if they consider that and as a means of making such areas safer and better places to live. these statutory principles have been breached. I
3l8.3l9_ANIFESTOLABOUR MANIFESTOa~
EQUALITY FOR ETHNIC MINORITIESOLabour supports genuine guarantees for ut Yependence sovereignty and territorial integrity ofi;
All the people of this country - whatever their race, colour or religion - must enjoy the full rights ofCyprus and supports the efforts of the United Nations to achieve them.:
citizenship. We support the human rights movement throughout the world, We champion the demand for free°
Our policies for employment, education, housing, health care, local government and much else willtrade unions in Poland. We will press the Russians to honour their obligations under international clearly be of benefit to people of the ethnic minorities as they will be to the whole community. human rights agreements.-.
In addition, Labour will take firm action to promote racial equality, to attack racial discriminationInternational terrorism is a growing menace to liberty and security. Labour is firmly committed to and to encourage contract compliance and other positive means of ensuring equity for all citizens. Westrengthening national provision and international cooperation in combating and defeating it.
will strengthen the law on public order to combat racial hatred and take firm action against the growingLabour's aim is to work constructively with our EEC partners to promote economic expansion andil imenace of racial attacks. We will make prosecution easier in order to encourage the reporting of offences. combat unemployment. However, we will stand up for British interests within the European Communi-‘
Labour's policy of firm and fair immigration control wilt ensure that the law does not discriminate onty and will seek to put an end to the abuses and scandals of the Common Agricultural Policy. We shall, the basis of race, colour or sex. like other member countries, reject EEC interference with our policy for national recovery and renewal.
A BETTER DEAL FOR CONSUMERSDEFENDING OUR COUNTRY:
When people make a purchase, they often feel they are treated unfairly, or even cheated. Labour'sLabour has a proud record of acting in defence of Britain. It was a Labour government which helped to4
Charter for Consumers will provide proper safeguards suited to modern conditions. establish the North Atlantic Alliance. It was a Labour government which in the l97Os put resources intoi
There will be firmer protection against unsafe goods. We will make producers strictly liable forrebuilding the Royal Navy and equipping the Royal Air Force with the most upto-date aircraft.
defective products. At the same time, Labour has always linked necessary defence with the need to reduce hostility;
We will provide easier means of redress for purchasers and stiffer penalties to deter illegal practices. between East and West. We must be alert in protecting our country and equally alert in helping to keep
We will take action to make sure that public bodies respond better to the needs and complaints ofaway the scourge of war and nuclear destruction.:
people who use their services. The incoming Labour government will maintain that record of effective defence whilst working to
We will bring in a statutory code of advertising practice. There will be powers to order the correctionlower international tension, fear and distrust. I of misleading advertisements. Labour's defence policy is based squarely and firmly on Britain’s membership of Nato. We are
We will improve access to legal services where necessary. determined to make the most useful possible contribution to the alliance. We can best do that by
There will be more safeguards for customers when companies go bankrupt. concentrating our resources on the non-nuclear needs of our army, navy and air force. i olaris system of nuclear delivery is ageing and will soonii
TOWARDS A FULLER LIFEexpensive American Trident system - 2 policy which increases ve clear anrament without ancrensing
Life is not only work. Labour will make provision for the coordination and development of leisuresecurity and, at the same time. diminishes our effective defences. Trident’s cost of up to £lO billion will amenities and the leisure and cultural industriestake up so much of our defence budget as to deny modern and necessary equipment to our front lineI
Our Support Sport programme will provide more resources for physical education and trainingforces. Indeed, this process is already happening.:
through more playing fields and facilities, better equipment and well-trained teachers and instructors. Labour rejects this dishonest and expensive policy. We say that it is time to end the nuclear pretence
We willish special talents and encourage wider participation in sport. and to ensure a rational conventional defence policy for Britain. E
We will encourage schools to open up their recreational facilities to the whole community and”So Labour will decommission the obsolescent Polaris system. We will cancel Trident and use the5 prevent the seiling off of school and other sports grounds. money saved to pay for those improvements for our army, navy and air force which are vital for the
We will set up a Sports Trust to channel resources into the development of community sportingdefence of our country and to fulfil our role in Nato. We will maintain a 5Ofrigate and destroyer na‘ facilities and the attraction of major international sporting events to Britain. We will play a full part in the development of the European Fighter Aircraft. We will invest in the bestiI
We will establish a Ministry for the Arts and Media with responsibility for the arts, crafts, publicupto-date equipment for the British Army of the Rhine.: i: Ilibraries, museums, film, publishing, the press, the record industry, the development of broadcasting andThat commitment to conventional defence will be based wherever possible on buying British-made:
access to it, fashion, design, architecture and the heritage. The Home Office will remain responsible forrather than foreign equipment. This policy will provide greater security for workers in our vital indus-' regulatory and statutory powers in relation to broadcasting. tries like aerospace, shipbuilding and engineering where jobs are in danger from the reductions which the/
The development of central and local government support for the arts, culture and entertainment isTories are making in conventional defence.; essential to the extension of choice, access and participation, and to the development of the relatedWe have always recognised that a properly negotiated and monitored international agreement toi industries.‘remove nuclear weapons from European soil would provide the most effective guarantee against the
We will protect the independence of the BBC and the independent broadcasting organisations. Wehorrors of nuciear war. It would be the most significant step towards an eventual worldwide renanciation reject subscription TV for the BBC and the auctioning of ITV franchises._ Of. and ban upon, nuclear weapons. That is why we were the first to propose to the superpowers the zeroE
We will legislate te ensure that ownership and contro! of the press and broadcasting media are: option vin respect of intermediate nuclear weapons,:
retained by citizens of Britain and to place limits on the concentration o ownership. We will strengthen; ur therefore strongly supports the talks beiii the ree ancl and set up a launch fund to assist new publications in order to encourage the diversity I aimed at reducing nuclear plein et Success in these cffone, to. retin the 2 tS meas necessary in a healthy democracy. cn nuclear missiles in Europe would be warmly welcomed. It would mean the removal! of America’s ruise missiere in Britain and in tj; H
MODERN BRITAIN IN A MODERN WORLDSoviet $$2Os and other short-range ine rest of Europe, as well as Pershing Is in Germany and the
The globe is torn by strife and oppression. A Labour Britain must play its part in promoting freedom and IWe naturally, therefore, want to assist that process in every way possible. If, however, it should fail; reducing conflict._shall, after consultation, inform the Americans that we wish them to remove their cruiis if Sand
Labour will play a full part in the United Nations Organisation and the Commonwealth. I other nuclear weapons from Britain. We would then become the ninth - of the si ro Nave membesce
Under the Conservatives, Britain picks and chooses which authoritarian countries to condemn andwhich do not have US nuclear weapons on their territory. This chaoft Id ereon Nato members -} which to befriend. Labour will stand up for freedom wherever it is oppressed - whether in Easternother US, British and joint defence and early warning systems in the United Kingdom. * not affect the
Europe, Latin America, Asia or Africa- We will oppose the extension of the arms race into outer space and will seek an ii4
The Thatcher government has made no real effort to foster freedom in South Africa and Namibia. agreement to abolish chemical weaponsseek an international
Labour will make the arms embargo complete, halt investment and commercial loans and ensure that°°
British measures against apartheid embrace those already adopted by the US Congress, the Common-THE WAR WE MUST FIGHT4 wealth and the EEC. We will support the imposition by the UN Security Council of comprehensiveThe world is aware, as never before, of the horrors of famine and poverty in many countries. A Labour; mandatory economic sanctions and provide help to the Front Line States who bear the brunt of SouthBritain will play its full part in defeating these scourges.,
African military and economic attack, i'e will set up a Department of Overseas Develi.4
We uphold the principle that it is wrong for one country to dominate or threaten another. We opposeMinister, We will double Britain's aid budget in order O ethioes the United Netiows ta ied wrt ped; the Soviet presence in Afghanistan. We oppose United States intervention in Nicaragua and the financ-cent of national income within five ycars. We will restore funding for development education We willI ' ing and arming of the Contra terrorists.; I Sive greater support to voluntary agencies. We will promote international action to lift the burden of: Labour will actively seck a stable peace in the Middle East which protects the security of Israel andthird world debt and improve the trading conditions of the developing countries.
recognises the right of Palestinians to self-determination. In all of our policies for making our aid commitment more effective we shall consult the agencies andI al32laLABOUR MANIFESTO althe men and women of the communities that use the aid to help to win their freedom from want andI atpoverty..:
SG iBRITAIN WILL WIN WITH LABOUR
‘ anOn June II, the people of Britain have the opportunity to put behind them the bleak years of aThatcherism and to give our country a fresh start. Labour's plans, carefully costed, prudently proaegrammed, can provide that start. I aTo go on under Toryism is to accept lower expectations and narrower horizons: it is to surrender to
OFnational decline and national division. l
Cok aWe must not shackle ourselves or burden our children with that future of failure. Together, we can beI ahsuccessful not just in material and economic terms, though these are vitally important, but also in termsl I a Iof our sense of purpose, our freedom, independence and confidence. i. udThat success can come only when the nation is restored to strength and unity in their fullest sense.:
ifLabour has the policies to generate efficient production and secure high standards of justice. Labour ihas the vision and commitment to stimulate the energies, the skills and the will to succeed of the British ipeople.
j 7In our precious democratic tradition, a general election passes power back from Parliament to the{ ' Apeople. We urge the people to use their power in their own interests, their families’ interests, their a if! country’s interests.:
i i: IBritain will win with Labour.
ei}ni elt)
(i )fate aah}: