a_
Labour’sI election janifestoIt's time to get Britain
April l992£lworking again
D> ): MdII
Winter ending
III
‘A cold coming we had of it’ huddled together in cardboard cities, I crouched over shared books in leaking classrooms, acrammed into peeling waiting-rooms, aaice stamped into crazy-pavingI round polluted streams. I
Winter ending: a paintings, poems bud hesitantly, I tentative chords behind boarded facades; I factories open like daffodils, I trains flex frozen rheumatic joints, I computer-screens blink on in the sudden daylight.
As the last cardboard boxes are swept away beneath busy bridges, the cold blue landscape of winter suddenly alive with bright red roses. I
I. Adrian Henri
©IMarch l992
III
III
I TTT. III Foreword by the Rt. Hon. Neil Kinnockre ae
+: Leader of the Labour Party7ey. I
-- ol, Immediate action for national recovery9ee.. 2. Building a strong economyllaI
3. Modernising the National Health Servicel5_I
Ch Raising standards in our schoolsl7I
5. The best future for familiesl9I. 6. Amodern democracy23.. I
7. Britain inanew world26. I. I.. I a,!
I ': iii i: i ee oe.
a ee dies
“eeeoI
Cg ee, aei
ES ae" hk at a Bae “eyeBe a Se! I a~ AbeaBe ee A eeaeoeae ae,\: 4 aee on ee bee ee se oe ° Bars. I ee bs2 Rs eperemamamets a Soe od pS ieOB 2 stig ise ke on ae\ i, OEBee sei eneeeee: pe ae a4
Oe ee ieBe Ss, BeSas Cage OF\
7Al Ae a. I
‘eee oe, [oe
2'ee ee aI
I%... I
*.. I
*. I l*.
«: I
I.»? ‘i
{*’
I.,
\of “
IaI
IIi
$CI ge tt aumento Sen sane ann nnnnennnannnneenennensessean aenassasanaaaaaI
I ' Foreword by the Rt. Hon. Neil Kinnock II
Leader of the Labour Party. I
This general election is a choice between a Conservative government paralysed by recession, and a Labour government determined to get on with building recovery. -oo. a.
Gripped by the longest recession since the war, Britain needs a government with a clear sense of direction andI
_purpose. A government with the people and the policies to get Britain working again and to achieve sustainedI recovery - strength with staying power. seaI
Labour will be such a government.;: I
~ But this election is not only a choice between policies, important though both are. It is also a choice betweenI
At the core of our convictions is belief in individual liberty..
OWe therefore believe:,
~First, that for liberty to have real meaning the standards of community provision must be high and access to that provision must be wide.
Second, that those rights of the individual must, like all others in a free society, belong to all men and women of every age, class and ethnic origin and be balanced by responsibilities of fair contribution and law-abiding _!
conduct. oe,
Third, that for rights and responsibilities to be exercised fully and fairly, government in Britain, as in other industrialised democracies, must work to build prosperity by properly supporting research, innovation, theI improvement of skills, the infrastructure and long-term industrial development.
Our vision for Britain is founded on these values. Guided by them, we will make our country moreI competitive, creative, and just; more secure against crime, aggression and environmental danger. We want government to serve the whole nation - using its power to realise this vision. I
Labour will be such a government.
These are our convictions and we will work to fulfil them. They are also downto-earth aims - essentialI objectives in a country hit by recession, suffering run-down public services and facing the intensifying pressures of European and global economic competition. I
All of those realities require that the government provides: a stable economic environment; education andI. training that fosters the abilities of all young people and adults; a firm emphasis on productive investment in both
C }the public and private sectors. I
Labour will implement and maintain those policies. They are vital for prosperity, for consistently low inflation and for continuous improvement in economic performance and living standards. They are also fundamental to improving the quality and quantity of provision in health and social services, and to combating poverty. We haveI absolute commitment to a high-quality National Health Service, free at time of need and not fractured andI weakened by underfunding and a commercialised contract system. We will get on with fulfilling thatI commitment from the moment of our election - by strengthening and modernising the NHS, by extending care in the community and by establishing the National Health Initiative to prevent illness.
Our pledges to increase the income of pensioners and families with children will urgently be fulfilled. OurI
_ undertakings to stop the perpetual experiments in schools and to raise standards of investment and achievement in education will be kept in full.
These policies - like those to increase house-building, improve transport and protect the environment - are notI only important to the well-being of the British people now. They are vital preparations for the future. In thatI future, we are determined that Britain will be a leader in the New Europe, setting higher standards and not. I surrendering influence by opting out. We have confidence in our country and in the qualities and potential ofits. - people. We want to nourish their artistic, scientific, sporting and other abilities. And we want to enhance their democratic power too. We shall therefore make constitutional and other changes that will give renewed vitalityto our democracy. We shall empower people as citizens and as consumers of public and private services. WeI inI
IiI
-will strengthen equality before the law and equality of opportunity for the majority of the. population -I
‘women: Neither their legal status nor their chances in education, training and employment are full orae free. We will ensure that the barriers to fairness are removed.. ae rn ae
~ These policies, like many others, manifést our practical commitment to freedom. That purpose is not confined to the shores of our country. In an age where liberty has made great advances in the world, thereI is still conflict, instability and want, causing great misery and inhibiting the peace and cooperationI which we want to help to build. We shall, therefore, ensure that our country has the defence capacity, theI strength of alliance and the peace-making ‘commitment necessary to safeguard the United Kingdom, to participate in international negotiations for disarmament, to deter aggression and to contribute to constructing a New World Order, now feasible through the strengthened United Nations. I
In our relations with the new democracies of Central and Eastern Europe as well as with the © poverty-stricken peoples of the South, we will work from the principle that political freedom needs the sure foundation of economic security. In this increasingly inter-dependent world there are no distant crises. The Labour government will therefore, as a matter of moral obligation and in the materialI interests of our country, foster the development and trade relationships necessary for the advance ofI
Oeconomic security, political democracy and respect for human rights. I
“The United Kingdom has been through l3 years in which unemployment has more than doubled, I irreplaceable assets have been wasted, markets at home and abroad have been lost, manufacturingI. investment has fallen, poverty has increased, the crime rate has rocketed, and talents have beenI neglected. I
Now our country faces clear alternatives. I
IA Conservative government would mean a repeat of the same, stale policies which brought economic insecurity, privatised and underfunded public services and increased social division. The Conservatives have no policies which would mean sustained recovery, higher health care or improved educationalI standards. The arrogance remains which brought us the poll tax, centralisation in Britain and isolation inI
IEurope. I
If they can’t get it right in l3 years, they never will. I
The Labour government will mean a fresh start for Britain. It will mean strong and continuedI emphasis on investment for economic strength. It will mean action to help families, fair taxation, incentives for enterprise and support for essential community services.
It will mean greater freedom, security and opportunity. It will mean change for the better.
It’s time to make that change.
It’s time for Labour. I, I; III
II!
if;
II‘ mediate action for nationarecoveryI
Britain faces a huge task of national reconstruction. Fromoe day one, the new governmenta
_must start to get BritainaeI working again. It must get. I4 the economy out of recession, EK teiwon, it must lay foundations for thehs oo weeBa ame future. Recovery must be- ae ae a based on investment, for only2 Ae ReeI investment will create lasting4 ot \onI prosperity. Ae Wy lhieI
Today, millions of people fear losing their job,4.- AOS:~ - their home or their business. The new Labour:- oeIe age government’s National Recovery Programmeoeeeee” will start to remove that fear, with immediateasneae_ action on investment, jobs and training. It willbebopteRrI combat recession now and build sustained and. Hog Ex7SI
C sustainable recovery for the future. a gypo a
Britain’s economic problems are deep- [4- bg el.* oe seated. We will not be able to do at once [Via a re4eee One I everything that we would like to do. But we > * 7weSe: ee “a4
Iwill get down to business right away. And asa. an?-ord aI with any properly-run business, ouree--:; oe “ immediate programme will be part of aoe;’ ro © I strategy for long-term success.. oS a 4 a4 égo 4; age3
Action for industrywe.~~I l. We will provide enhanced capital\Bo- CY allowances to encourage companiesllia-- immediately to bring forward manufacturing\ ooRo ee ae investment in new machinery and plant,\e ee“oe bod ae innovation and design. This will last for aae. gs4 limited period. eea
2. We will introduce an investment tax §- Be ~~.4 incentive tailored to the special needs of small Rissa en i ey, a
Ss... al
I a ll, to_I
I[-
3. We will immediately begin the phased: Amoao, release of receipts from the’ sale of council: Action for children I RnI houses, land and property receipts to allow’’..9- We will start to incréase nursery education © rn local authorities to build new homes and _ Places for three and four year olds by making~oe improve old ones. More building workers in Sure that local councils actually use the moneyos the recession-savaged construction. and they receive for nursery education to createae Oe Seige Se building supply industries will be employed I ew Places and by switching capital funds’aSopI and more families rehoused. Equivalent ¢atmarked for the City Technology Collegeme a arrangements will be made in Scotland. programmes. This will lead to the rapid creation of 25, OOO new places.:
4. We will allow British Rail to proceed withI a leasing scheme of l88 new Networker trains lO. We will extend the exemption from tax on the North Kent line - the first step in which applies to workplace nurseries to allI securing private investment to help modernise forms of employer assistance with childcare. I
Britain’s railways and protect our: I environment. Getting resultsI
Every action we propose makes sense by itself. I. PTogether, our proposals add up to a coAction for jobsordinated programme for recovery. I
C ‘5. Housing investment will generate jobs. WeI
~ will also establish a work programme, By investing in house-building and repairs, I combining three days a week work for the we start to rehouse homeless people. I unemployed - paid at the proper rate - with two days’ training and job seeking. This willBy investing in public transport, we start to benefit the community and ensure that transform commuters’ lives and create a unemployed people are offered a range of cleaner environment.. I employment and training opportunities. The. I programme, which can be quickly and easilyBy investing in the NHS, we offer new established, will allow us to start bringing security to the patients and the public.
down unemployment immediately. Our aim is to prevent long-term unemployment, rather. By investing in education, we nourish the than just trying to cope with it after it has talents of children and lay the basis for futureI occurred. success.. With each step, we employ more workers in
Action for skillsindustries from construction and computer and schoolssoftware, to high-tech engineering, printing.>.. and publishing. We enable businesses to: I
6. We will restore last year’s training cuts hrive. We save taxpayers’ money on benefits which caused so much damage to training forWe wn épay’ye_:: e transform unemployment claimants into
~young people and the unemployed. We will emploved contributors
C Jestablish a new cash-limited Skills for the 9Osploy!; I fund, with an initial b ude oft 3OO million, kLabour’s programme for national recovery parade the a he ° dom woul ie * will this year help bring Britain out ofI nvestment will be targeted particularly at recession. Public investment will moderniseI areas of skill shortages and will give pe oP le services, help business and industry and who are now unskilled the chance to acquire stimulate private investment. It will make you basic skills. and your family better off. I
7. Over the next 22 months, additional!
resources of at least £6OO million will be;; available for investment in education. I
Amongst other projects, this will help toI tackle equipment shortages and the backlog ofI school repairs.
Action for the NHSa
’ 8. Over the next 22 months, additional - resources of at least £l billion will be available. '. for investment in the National Health Service.
-. ° This will help the NHS to make real advances
-.-in care and treatment.._, I lO3II
__nn oOIinI
Building a strong
Undine a strong -I economy. I
Labour’s economic policy rests on one simple, commonsense fact. The only way for Britain to build a strong economy is toI make the goods and services which people at home and abroadI want to buy. I
Britain is in a race for economic survival and women have lost their jobs on every working A government which success. Faced with intense competition, day since John Major became Prime Minister. business can do companies and countries can succeed only by Every week, 9OO businesses go bankrupt.- constantly improving their performance. Every day, 2OO families lose their homes. business with
Every employee in every enterprise’ must beModern government has a strategic role, notI involved in a new partnership so that trainedto replace the market but to ensure that the' and talented people can use the most modernThe Conservatives have created the longest market works properly. Other competitors inI technologies to create top-quality products. recession for 6O years. They have noideahow Europe and elsewhere recognise that I
‘to get us out of itand even less ideahowtostay industrial policy must be at the heart of I
But none of this will happen with a out of it. Britain needs a’ Labour government, economic policy. It is the government’s government that believes that the best thingis I which will back British industry in the way responsibility to create the conditions for I to do nothing. Three thousand men and our competitors back theirs. enterprise to thrive.!
I \ iN i,\Vag. iy SycA x \% ¥ + 3 & s. I
A REE TAL, a aaa. Tt -»>>a"Po. a von [f isog TEM ek PN PO
Boal GF i] ie° aiI I a>ie aa if a a i! I
I: I
Business needs sustained and balanced £4O5 a week pay contributions on all their in unemployment and_ have explained in our I: growth, stable exchange rates, steady and earnings, while above:: that level no. National Recovery Programme just how this competitive interest rates and low inflation. contributions are paid at all. This is an unfair _ will be done: It includes immediate action for
We will deliver them.». anomaly in our tax structure. The ceiling on unemployed people, as well as directI contributions will therefore be abolished. investment - for instance, in construction - to
Business must have a high level of* - create thousands of new jobs.
education, science and: skills. Incentives for We will take 74O, OOO taxpayers out of, I high-tech investment. Modern transport. taxation altogether by increasing the personalSteady and sustained economic growth will
Strong regional economies for new allowance and wife’searned income allowance generate jobs that last. Better training will developments. We will deliver them. by more than inflation. Married couples will help people get back to work.
have the option of splitting the married.. coupie’s allowance between thein as they Unemployment must be tackled by the
We will keep priceschoose. European Community as a whole. We willuse I downour influence in Europe to secure the
Inflation has been suppressed by recessionThe basic rate of tax will remain unchanged _ necessary policies for coordinated growth.
I.“at 25 per cent, as will the 4O per cent rate. A
But it has not been cured.::
new top rate income tax of 5O per cent will
ITo curb inflation, Labour will maintain theBern thie wea with an income of atleast We will moder nise
I C walue of the pound within the European,, Britain’s industriesI i“ Exchange Rate Mechanism. We will manageLabour’s tax and benefit changes are self- It is time to rebuild Britain’s industrialI
Icredit sensibly. We will stop excessive price financing. They are fair. And they will make strength. For lasting recovery, Britain needs aI
Irises in oENHS clectricity telephones, every individual employee on earnings up to modern industrial policy designed to buildI
I transport anPrescriptions: at least £22, OOO a year better off. skills, upgrade technology, encourage
Ioe, industry in every region and expand:
IThe only way to defeat inflation in theexports.
imedium term is to raise productivity.
tsubstantially. By promoting investment and We will reformAn Investment Decade for Britain will start
Iimproving skills, we will tackle the underlyingdecision-makingwith the immediate introduction of enhanced causes of inflation. Britain urgently needs a better way of making -_ investment allowances (see page 9). We willI ieconomic decisions. Government must decide _ help Britain’s high-technology industries withI
}rT a. at the same time how much to spend and how -_a 25% tax credit for additional investment in
We will introduce fairto pay for spending. The Budget should _ research and development. Small firms will be
Itaxesdecide both. assisted with a new investment scheme,
IAttacking poverty is an essential componentcombining a cash-limited fund for new
Iof Labour’s programme for national recoveryEvery autumn, we will make a State of the investments with tax incentives tailored to
Iand prosperity. The most effective way to Nation report on the British economy. Our their special needs.; reduce poverty quickly is to increase child national economic assessment will then allow benefit and pensions and take low-paid people employers, trade unions and other socialBritain’s industrial future depends onI out of taxation. To achieve these goals, we will partners to consider Britain’s competitiveness transforming our inventive genius into j oO reform the national insurance and income tax and the competing claims on national output. manufacturing strength. Labour will workI system. These considerations will be an important with industry to establish British TechnologyI influence on collective bargaining. IEnterprise and create Technology Trusts
We will increase child benefit to £9.95 athroughout Britain, building bridges betweenI week for all children with the full value going In order to provide honest information industries _ and universities and helping to every family. This measure will benefit about the state of the British economy, we will firms turn good ideas into commercial seven million families and is worth £l27.4O a make the Central Statistical Office products. We will encourage the development year to a family with two children. independent and free from political of the most modern telecommunications interference.~~ networks.
We will increase the basic retirementSo; ogee;; pension by an extra £5 a week for a singleWe will halt the deterioration which hasLabour s Minister for Science will develop person and £8 for'a married couple. All _ taken place in the pay and conditions of many a national strategy to promote high-quality pensioners will receive the full increase, which _ public service workers ~ often through pay science and technology, so that Britain can will also go to widows and others on benefits _ settlements which have been arbitrarily better anticipate and respond to the challenges linked by statute to the basic pension level. imposed upon them. We will seek fairer and of the future. I
Twelve million people will benefit. more rational ways of determining public; sector pay within clearly defined budgetAll over the world, industries face
We will abolish the two per cent national __ limits. unprecedented environmental challenges. WeI
Iinsurance contribution on earnings under £54. environmentally friendly: technologies adI
_ unemploymentJpublicise and to promote sales of the cleanest
I.. At present, employees earning less than We are determined to make a swift reduction _ British technologies. I
IizI
We will strengthen ourWe will improve energy_ Instead of the Present series of PiecemealI
7; zinitiatives we will establish a coherent nationa regional economiessuppliestraining policy to meet the needs of industryI
We will establish new Regional Development -_ Families, commerce and industry need heat, and provide people with real equalI
Agencies in England, strengthen Scottish light and power at prices they can afford. opportunities at work. All employers, exceptI
Enterprise and the Welsh Development Britain is well placed with reserves of coal, oil for very small businesses, will be obliged to
Agency and modernise regional incentives. and gas which must be husbanded in a invest a minimum amount on training theirI
Regional agencies will become powerhouses _ national energy policy to balance the needs of _ workforce or make a contribution to the local for industrial development, encouraging the present with those of the future. We will or national training effort. Training will be a investment, technology and skills. The encourage enhanced recovery of oil from the _real partnership between government and
Scottish Parliament will have a vital role in North Sea and avoid becoming too dependent _ industry, not an excuse to shift all the burden building the competitive strength of the on imported fuel. We will meet our onto employers.
Scottish economy. Our new Welsh Assembly international obligations to reduce harmful will also have important economic chimney emissions. We will transform the Careers Service to responsibilities. make careers advice available to everyone,,. We will restore public control of the young or old, employed or unemployed.
Labour's National Investment Bank, National Grid and give it new duties and operating on strictly commercial lines, will powers to ensure the long-term security ofBritain cannot get the best performance bring public and private sector together to electricity supplies. We will secure the long- _ from our employees by giving them the worst
C pea in long-term regional and national Loin future of the coal industry by reducing treatment. There will be a fair framework of!
«nfrastructure projects. imports, stopping the ‘dash for gas’ and _ law for both employers and unions. There willI.,. reining back on open-casting. We will retain be no return to the trade union legislation of
Small and growing businesses will have a the Department of Energy and move its the l97Os. Ballots before strikes and for union new deal. As well as the lowest possible petroleum engineering directorate to _¢lections will stay. There will be no mass or interest rates, they need the backing on which Aberdeen, We will require the energy _ flying pickets. But our individual employees, their competitors can rely Jn France and companies to invest in R&D, and encourage are entitled to be treated at least as fairly as
Germany. Labour will establish a network of the development of clean-burn coal _ their colleagues in Europe. I one-stop advice centres providing them with technoloI access to high-quality specialist assistance. By: We will opt in to the Social Chapter of theI ay cs.. a. new European Treaty and _ introduceI
We will give special _attenuion (O the We will invest in people employment standards common in successful establishment of small businesses by women; at workeconomies, including the best health andI and members of the ethnic minority. safety legislation. The existing protectionI communities, who often face difficulties The key toa successful modern economy isa provided for people engaged in especiallyI raising venture capital. well-educated and motivated workforce. We - pazardous work will be retained., cannot compete on the basis of low
Under the Conservatives, Britain has educational standards or poor wor king - Women and men must be able to care for moved from manufacturing trade surplus to conditions. Britain’s future must be high skill, - jheir family as well as earn a living. We willI manufacturing trade deficit. The recent high wage and high tech. give all employees equal rights and status privatisation of the Export creat Guaranteeunder the law, whether they are full-time orI
(-pepartmen can only do further ces fog Two things are needed: a training part-time, permanent or temporary. We aim
“ur will Create modern export services lOf - savotution to modernise people’s skills, and to guarantee every woman in employment the the nation and the regions. rights for employees to fair treatment at right to l4 weeks’ maternity leave on full pay, work, and to give fathers paternity leave, bringingI
We will invest inBritain into line with the better provisionI modern transportWe will offer unemployed people a range of - elsewhere in the European Community.
Commuters and companies need fast, safe employment and training opportunities. Our‘I transport. Labour will act to make sure they aim is to ensure that anyone who isEmployees will have new rights to be get it. unemployed for more than six months has a consulted -and informed about decisions choice of job experience or training. We will which affect them, as well as the right to union
It is absurd that French Railways can raise also help the people often left out of good membership and representation. We will funds for new investment in the City of training opportunities, including the restore _union rights at GCHQ. Anti-
‘London, when British Rail is not allowed to disabled, women returning after caring for discrimination law will be strengthened andI do so. We will remove these restrictions.. children, and those with special educational we will consider as part of that law outlawing
Leasing schemes will allow large-scale - needs. discrimination in employment on the grounds investments to be financed at relatively littleof age.
cost to the public sector borrowingExpanded childcare will help womenoy;- requirement. return to work and undertake training. A _Britain’s Wages Councils set minimum I critical task is to upgrade the skills of people in Wages for about 2.5 million people. But thereI
Private finance will also be mobilised for a work. Training and Enterprise Councils will is no minimum wage for all employees. WeI high-speed rail network which will eventually __be retained, reformed and made more broadly _will end the scandal of poverty pay and bring link every region to the Channel Tunnel, with - representative of their local communities and _Britain into line with the rest of Europe byI proper environmental safeguards. given stable budgets. introducing a statutory minimum wage of I l3I
IizI
£3.4O an hour. This is a major but long:
Ioverdue reform which will benefit around four: Le million low-paid people, 8O per cent of whom. I are women. We will consult widely to ensure. I smooth implementation.
We will promote a stakeI ' for employees.
Employees should have the opportunity to:; I own collectively a significant stake in the: company for which they work, through a, democratic Employee Share Ownership PlanI
(ESOP) or a cooperative. We will strengthenI support for such schemes and consult about the possibility of creating a new tax incentive
Ito encourage companies to establish or extendI an ESOP or set up a cooperative.
I _ Recent pension fund scandals have shown
All C ) how right Labour has been to call for stronger
~” legal protection. We will reform the law so that pension funds belong to their members, notto -, alemployers. Half of the pension trustees will be ailemployees, with an independent chairman, I and pensioners will be represented. III. IIl[
I: I, I: III i. t: I: I;; I
I.! II
Fi4ISsi
This election will decide the future of the NHS. Indeed, it will decide whether or not we continue to have a NHS of the kind that the British people want.
The Conservatives would continue to commercialise andI
( yivatise the NHS until it is run as just another business. I
With Labour, It will be modernised and restored as a highI quality public service, accountable to the community. I
Labour will stop the privatisation of the NHS _ persistently underfunded the health service. underfunding. Unlike the Conservatives, we and return opted-out hospitals and other It may well take at least the lifetime of a will not impose any new health charges.
services to the local NHS. We will halt the Parliament to put things right, but Labour commercial market which is creating a two-iiii tier health service6will start immediately. Instead of cuttingLabour will recognise the additional claims
Our commitment to theincome tax, we will make additional TesOurces on the NHS from the growing number of very of at least £l billion available for investmentin elderly people and the development of
NHS; the NHS over the next 22 months. Each year medical technology and knowledge. We will
For a decade, the Conservatives have thereafter, we will continue to tackle setain the pay review bodies. We will not cheat I a4.4ooee eS. jai_-os aeEEime fe“Ae¢
I ¢ Ce.
Mes4 a. a be. Ce2aa,. 4e Po ES cc. Wert l7 oS -(oI Ae b a. -_... oy.. LE AEE aa 2ee eeeee SOly gemee rect naee I
S. Ge eo >. ye. a vas es,; SEoe ~ ” meek daa tom aa ger" aeeet. ai+ etre ST* a& ne PagytSenta
IPG4
Pee eemno ae; rikPere er eereee. BoeEN aaae, eea ee Noe i. I health authorities by agreeing pay awards -incentives to improve performance -. but @ increase early admissions from waiting which are not fully funded and leaving without the queue-jumping and waste createdlists. 3:.
managers to bridge the gap by cutting patient by a market in health care.
care. We will invest in the modernisation of. As part of our commitment to a qualityI our hospitals and tackle the backlog of repairsWe will provide more services through localService to P atients, we will end compulsoryi and maintenance. health centres and other. community competitive tendering for hospital support settings. We will give GPs the power to insistSETVICES, which has driven down standards ofI
We will also launch a new programme to on improvements in service to all the patients cleanliness and catering. I invest £6O million in the modernisation of _ in a neighbourhood.‘aeaI
Britain’s cancer services, using the resourcesWe will invest £25 million from within ourI we will save by scrapping the Conservatives’We will give the outcome of treatment the overall budget to purchase several hundred tax handout on private medical insurance. same importance as the throughput of OM EW: fully-equipped ambulances. I
Within our overall budget, we will tackle-the treatment. Our new Health QualityI shortage of intensive care beds with a special Commission will monitor the quality of care A community service programme providing an additional £25 _. and raise standards. Labour will expand the services which elderly million to expand this life-saving service.. le and their carers need for lone-tern: The continuing care of very elderly and support in the community, such ne home
A healthy Britainchronically sick patients will be a higher helps, care assistants and community services. I
( Labour will launch a National Health Priority. Ni me halt the reduction in NHS Our Department of Health and Community
~ Initiative to promote physical and mental health oF one Nich care an ‘derhy ant Care, with a new Minister of State for health from birth to old age. This initiative disabled patients at home. ort elderly anCommunity Care, will develop a high-quality lwill be led by the Department of Health and°programme of community care which
Community Care and by a new CabinetTo achieve this change of direction, we will responds to what users want.
icommittee that will cut through departmental.. I iboundariesnegotiate Performance Agreements with eachWe will introduce a new earmarked grant:. health I authority and back them I with aN for community care which will support theI 'We will set new targets to cut the mnoentive F ene reward authorities which work of Labour councils in providing care forI: inequalities in health between social classes tar cc which teflece Incal. orioritios vor people at home, and oblige Conservative I iand ethnic groups. Our Health Initiative will rane to cut waiting lists or awitch mental councils to use the grant to improve those
Iset targets for better health, backed by health services into the community. Hospital Services. We will end the pressure on councils effective action. We will, for instance: managers, who will be accountable for wrovding fu nding resident homes I byI
/ @ strengthen Soreening by restoring the meeting their targets, will otherwise be given equivalent to the benefits paid to private ifree eye test; maximum freedom of decision making. homes. I
I@ cut cancer by banning tobaccoWe will create new community healthWas:
Iadvertising; authorities, representative of local. people, We Ms ill eof. that “ _ rst fall on sie the which bring together both GP services and rom thé sa ma mental healt ospitals "8
I @ encourage healthy diets by introducing hospital care. provision of better accommodation and
I; clearer food labelling; services in the community for mental health
I C)users and people with learning disabilities. I terh.. We will end the neglect that has allowed someI
I @ Promos ee bacional creating A first-class service to former patients to end up sleeping rough and: within the NHS. pati entsled to others being placed on remand. Labour
I:.:. will ensure that these services are in place
GPs have a vital role to play in health In Labour's health service, power will belong before patients who will benefit fromlife inthe -_I. promotion. We will increase the time they to patients, not accountants. We will restore community are wansferred out of long-term have for each patient by reversing the financial the right of patients to be treated in the - fogpital care.
pressures to take on too many patients. We _ hospital of their choice. Women will have the
Iwill make sure every community has access to _ right to be seen by a woman GP and we willI
’ dentists,. with the resources to provide full I encourage the development of well women t. _. NHS cover we will and restore the free dental _ clinics. Ethnic minorities will have the right toI icheck. obtain the diet required by their religious i. beliefs.: By improving family planning services, we.. I: i... will reduce unwanted pregnancies and helpWe will set four new standards for a better
‘I achieve our target of cutting the number of service to: I f.. abortions by at least a quarter. We will ensure. ae
I +" that access to abortion is equally available in bd cut cancelled operations; I po Noy Region.-@ improve cleanliness in hospitals; I
] Amodern NHS -“emake it easier to phone for axI
‘f° -. We will create a modern, efficient NHS with ambulance; I tL TC TS SSae
ITTsate er. i
’III
Raising standards! l our schools
Good education is the best investment in Britain’s future.
All girls and boys, from every background, must be able to discover their talents and fulfil their potential. I
C ) ‘We want every child to get qualifications thatLabour will modernise Britain’s schools. education if their parents so wish.
“count. We need safe, disciplined schools, I Over the next 22 months, additional resources; where professional teachers work closely with _ of at least £6OO million will be made availableWithin six months, every local education parents. Learning must become a lifetime for investment in education. We will then authority will have to set targets for steadily opportunity, with new chances to update skills I continue steadily to increase the share of increasing nursery and childcare services.
at work. Britain’s national wealth invested in Childhood Partnerships between councils, education. parents, schools, local businesses and I
That is our vision of a well-educatedcommunity groups will help extend a wide I
Britain. We will offer nurseryrange of childcare and nursery education I
Britaeducation to three and “:
But, under the Conservatives, Britain today invests a smaller share of our national wealth four year oldsThe immediate investment in childcare I in education than in l979. More and moredescribed earlier (see page lO) is only the.
parents are now being forced to pay for By the end of the decade, all three and four _ beginning. Our Ministry for Women will have essentials in a system which should be free. year olds will have the opportunity of nursery a central role in helping to develop a I. a t* ~e o ae Ye a Be4- ok aes: conte PidcxES a,\ “3 ae aese2, Lap me we wn ”Li. “aE A ‘te itaap..<<" J --III nationwide childcare strategy, including out- Guaranteed standardsemployers, teachers, pupils and the inspectorate will be scrapped. Our Educationmel five-subject A ‘level and. Standards Commission, together with her Dring it together with technical qualificationsI
We will raise standardsMajesty’s Inspectors, will monitor the l time and full-time students of a pent. performance of every school., If a school is partCas m € students Of any age; ItI in our schoolsunder-performing, the commission, which will include ‘credits’ which can be transferred
By investing in better teaching, smaller classes _ will be answerable to Parliament, will have thebetween ifferent institutlons. We will consult and modern books and equipment, we will powers to ensure that it is brought up to wh elya out the detailed structure of this new raise education standards. standard. qualification, and finalise Proposals quickly.
Teachers will be guaranteed a proper salaryNational Awards, similar to the Queen’sto Young rhe ke must have real opportunities and career structure. A General Teaching Award for Industry, will encourage excellence ear olds not i fallt ducati ° will he
Council for England and Wales willhelp them __in schools. year ales not in ime ¢ ucation€.:. entitled to a new traineeship lasting for up to achieve the highest professional standards. two years, with an option of a furth
Higher quality training will be followed byWe will reform the Conservatives’ scheme¥ E >P7_& fuptner twoI proper support for newly-qualified teachers. for the local management of schools. All years. Every young person i employmen t
A national inservice raining programme will _ schools will be free to manage their dayto-dawill be guaranteed the right to Learn While
8 programr:: Bet yto-cay You Earn.
ensure that all teachers are fully qualified in budgets, with local education authorities
WC ubject they are teaching. given a new strategic role. Opted-out schools Labour’s education. will be freed from central government controltargets
Within l2 months, we will end the scandal and brought together with City Technology of primary school classes of over 4O children. Colleges into the mainstream of the local We have set ourselves four education targets. I
We will then establish and steadily reduce school system. They are the basis for our strategy and the maximum limits on class sizes, until noDenchynark against which progress will be primary school child is taught in a class of New rights for parentsJuaged. I
We will reform the Conservatives’ scheme forFirst, a nursery education for all three andI
To make sure that children are reading by _ the local management of schools. All schools _ four year olds whose parents wish by the year the age of seven, we will create a national Will be free to manage their dayto-day 2OOO.
Reading Standards Programme, with a budgets, with local education authorities_' national Reading Recovery Programme to given a new strategic role. Opted-out schoolsSecond, within five years, we want four out help those in difficulty. £2O million will be will be freed from central government control __of five l6 to l8 year olds to be able to achieve at invested in reading recovery in the first year, and brought together with City Technology least five GCSEs at grades A, B or C, or their
National tests must provide the information Colleges into the mainstream of the local equivalent.
needed to help pupils, and to judge schools’ School system. I effectiveness, without wasting good teachingThird, by the end of the decade, we want time. Children with special needs or specialHome-school contracts will tell parents half of Britain’s l6 to l9 year olds to be able to abilities will receive the extra attention they ¢xactly what the school undertakes to deliver qualify at the new Advanced Certificate level de. and what their responsibilities are. If they are A levels or the equivalent in BTEC and other
‘eydissatisfied with the school or education postl6 opportunities for study.
Nine out of ten secondary school children authority, they will be able to call in’ the are in comprehensive schools. We will end Education Standards Commission and get Fourth, within 2O years, we will double theI selection at ll where it still exists. We will action taken. number of students in higher education, with introduce a fairer system for all schoolat least one in three young adults participatingI reorganisations, with independent -publicWe wish to see the key role of church and __ by the year 2OOO.
enquiries. We will phase out the Assisted other voluntary-aided schools secured and
Places scheme (without affecting pupils available equally and on the same criteria to allThe student loan scheme deters many currently on a place, or offered one from religions. bright youngsters from poor families. We willI
September l992) 'and redirect the savings toIreplace it with a fairer system of student grantsI meet wider educational needs. We will modernise theeee wn pele for housing and venI
Because the national curriculum cannot be CUP riculumsafeguard standards throughout _ higherI properly taught without new textbooks, we Labour will modernise the national curric- education.
will earmark funds for class and library books. -_ ulum and apply it in all schools. From the age
Every child needs a good grounding in science _of l4, pupils will study five essential subjects: We will stop the Conservatives’ adult and technology. We will introduce a English, mathematics, science, a modern education cuts and encourage local authorities programme to improve equipment and _ IJanguage and technology. In schools teaching to develop adult and community education laboratories. We will start to tackle the in Welsh, the study of Welsh will be included. and access courses, particularly for matureI backlog of school repairs. For instance, we - Every pupil will also be offered a wide range of -_ students. People over 5O who missed earlier will invest £3O million to ensure that within l2. academic, technical and other options. opportunities will be able to apply for a months, no child has to use an outside,.‘Return to Learn’ grant towards further orI lavatory. geTaking account of the views of parents, - higher education. I nenanne
IlI
III communities
Britain’s families deserve the support which families receive in other European countries. We will create a new sense ofI
C ymmunity and social cohesion.. I
We will make familiesa better off
As we explained earlier (see page l2), we will eewe isco es a increase child benefit for seven millionooawoes families. Higher pensions and related benefitseeae° will benefit another l2 million people. We willoii: lYb.
reform the tax and national insurance system, sf. eccegalll.
and take 74O, OOO low-paid people out of tax.‘es osa; a
After the first year’s extra increases we willaeA wa” restore the link between increases in the basicfe ail * ia ee pension and prices or earnings, whichever is% oeee higher. aila
Britain’s national insurance system is farTO4nt 8 I more efficient than private insurance. We willeXFg oafi ay 4. nae open it up to new groups such as low-paid and Sk SmAe: ae
), aips Be IANY Uae
Labour will end the Conservatives’ freeze iM...‘ANY i a aaim on benefits for widowed mothers and other l oY. a‘ AS we xi agfo lone parents. We will encourage parents on aes 4. ) ¥ _I Fs aa income support to claim maintenance by ao ee. “ aa a- ay 7 ~:. re allowing them to keep part of it before benefitroTM-. os s ee eee. we
We will restore nutritional guidelines for owa a4 Aeee school meals and reverse the cuts in free 9a ial“oea Peat: oak school meals as soon as possible. ed “aereae, NI
We will reform benefits for people with [4‘ disabilities and make it easier for those ig7 available for work to take employment. As __. INan resources allow, we will improve and extend Sq I Siinvalid care allowance.~~ a ae~ 2
Labour will develop a flexible decade of retirement between the ages of 6O and 7O, so that men and women can choose to retire on a.
full pension or continue in work withoutI discrimination.
Our new National Pensions Plan, building under l8 and provide more refuges for womenWe will implement the recommendations of on the State Earnings Related Pension escaping domestic violence., the. Woolf.. Report to. improve prison
Scheme, will offer people now in work a* conditions. Prison must offer training. for pension based on their 2O best years’ earnings. Labour will keep the right to buy. We will employment, not for crime. We will promote
Those who are self-employed will also be able increase the number of homes for rent by non-custodial sentences for non-violent to join. Occupational and personal pension _ establishing a Housing Bank to facilitate the crimes and take. steps to eradicate the schemes will have to guarantee a minimum _ balanced use of councils’ capital receipts and discrimination ‘in sentencing policy which pension before they can contract out, and offer investment capital at attractive rates of particularly affects women and ethnic guarantee equal treatment for men and __ interest. Tenants will be offered the option to minority offenders.
women.‘part rent, part buy’. Steps will be taken to;
‘improve sub-standard housing...
We will reform means-tested benefits, People have a right to replace the Social Fund, and restore benefitCouncil tenants will be guaranteed real first-class servicesI rights to l6 and l7 year olds as soon as rights over their homes. Councils will set rents We will develop customer contracts for local possible. To relieve anxiety about funeral at a reasonable level, reflecting income levels services, along the lines pioneered by LabourI costs, we will introduce a funeral payment of in the different regions and localities. We will authorities. Local communities will helpI
£6OO, available on request. The costs will in eliminate racial discrimination in housing design services to meet their needs, with most cases be recovered from the deceased’s allocation and improve safety on estates. voluntary groups playing a key role in
Cate, although small estates will bedelivering services.
disregarded. In the private sector there is a need both for.. homes at market rents and those where rentsOurnewQuality I Commission,
We will abolish the poll are regulated and housing benefit payable. We incorporating the work of the Audit taxwill consult fully before introducing reforms Commission, will ensure councils provide
Labour will abolish the poll tax immediately, 274 Wil! not legislate retrospectively. high-quality, value-for-money services, with
We will replace it with our Fair Rates system,.:; clear avenues for complaint and redress. We related to people’s ability to pay. We reject theAll tenants must be protected against noise, -_ will not tolerate shoddy service, inefficiency te::: nuisance, harassment and shoddy service. or waste. Councils will have to carry out an
Conservatives’ unfair banding and discount:.
system, which would create a property poll.: Fannual survey of customer _Satisfaction, ya: property PLeaseholders will have new rights, either to _ published just before local elections.
tax. We will modernise the val uation system tO extend ‘their lease, or collectively buy the ensure that properties are fairly assessed. freehold of their property from non-residentThe contracts of chief officers will be linked
Abolition of the minimum 2O per cent freeholders. to quality targets, with senior managers ae;:: required to sample the service they provide.
contribution - which will be of particular help. Compulsotitive tenderiill be to young people - will be followed by an We will protect peoplempuisory competitive tendering wilt t improved rebate system, with special help to against crimeabolished, but the Quality Commission will retired people on low incomes living alone. ieee. have the power, where services have broken
Business rates will become a local tax againCrime in Britain has more than doubled since down, to insist that they are put out to tender,:> l979. Over five million crimes were recorded - with contractors required to meet conditions with rate rebates for small firms.:;::
last year, but the real total is certainly such as quality thresholds and fair
C People need decenthigher. employment.
homesLabour will insist that local councils workLocal planning must reflect what people,
- Labour will establish mortgage rescue with the police to improve crime prevention not developers, want. The Conservatives’ schemes throughout the country, enabling bybonfire of planning controls has led to illhome buyers to remain as tenants or part-thought out development, often against the owners. Mortgage interest tax relief will @ modernising vulnerable estates; wishes of local people. Labour will give people continue at the present rate. We will seek new -more say in drawing up plans for their area arrangements to enable first-time buyers to @ improving street lighting; and create a new right of appeal for residents concentrate relief in the early years. Housingagainst developments which fly in the face ofI log books and an end to gazumping will also @ demolishing derelict buildings; their local plan. Beneficial development will help home buyers. We will also ensure thatbe speeded up, damaging development home-buyers receive proper advice about the @ fencing off waste-land. checked and the green belt safeguarded. We potential cost of their mortgages in futurewill reverse the present planning presumption years. Planning applications will be examined in favour of opencast coal mining and give top
7against crime prevention criteria. The sale of priority to local people and _ their
Councils and housing associations will be replica guns will be banned. environment.
allowed to lease or buy empty homes in order,.
to provide accommodation for homelessElected police authorities will use the extra Councils must be people. Homes left empty without good resources available for the war against crime to accountable to local reason by any public authority will be I ensure that more police officers are visible on, transferred to. a better social landlord. the beat, backed up by the modern technology PCOpPleI which is essential to crime prevention and We shall introduce annual elections in
We will restore housing benefit to peopledetection. England and Wales, with one third ofI
2OII councillors elected each year. Councillors @ tougher health and safety standards; enforced by an independent EnvironmentalI must get proper support, to ensure that theyaProtection. Executive. We will develop a are drawn from all parts ofthe communityand compensation for injury from dangerous ational waste strategy promoting waste are not financially disadvantaged. products; minimisation, reuse and recycling. Business will be encouraged to have environmental
Labour will sign the European Charter of @ comprehensive guarantees; audits. The trade in toxic waste will be
Local Self Government and give local councilsbanned.
a general power of competence, in line wih @ g fast, simple remedy if things go other European countries, so that councils canwrong. We will establish a new legal right to a clean develop new and imaginative services. environment, ensure environmental freedomI;; We will press for similar standards of information, implement EuropeanI
We will reform the system for allocating throughout the European Community and environmental - standards such as grants to local councils and introduce less strengthen the work of consumer groups and Environmental Impact Assessment andI centralised rules on capital spending, advice centres so that aspirations and promote a European Environmental Charter.
enabling councils to make prudent long-term standards are met.: Every government policy will be subjected to investment. environmental appraisal, coordinated by a. Every utility will be required to provide a Cabinet Minister for Environmental
We will support arts and customer contract, with compensation if Protection. An annual Green Book assessing isurestandards are not met. Gas and electricity the environmental impact of governmentI uilding on the example of many Labour disconnections will be banned completely economic policy will acccompany the councils which have developed imaginative Where young children or elderly people are _ traditional financial Red Book. I arts initiatives, we will make the arts a Concerned. We will regulate telephone statutory responsibility for local authorities. S€tvices which demean women and corrupt
Labour’s Ministry for the Arts and Media will children. Improving inner cities ress, to develop new ideas and attract more Utilities, enforce standards through our meant that the inner cities have lost out in
PFESS; P.. CoPp. i Cc issid__ terms of local government finance, housing people. Government wil! commission the bestnsumer frotection Commission, aninvestment andf\I designers, artists and architects, for instance, ©7SUFe prices are cut or other action taken labo te will an i voerher he employment.
to help communities transform run-down city Where profits are excessive so that the ‘nat ve Pull together the event abe °- centres. customer gets a fair deal. We will establish a OFdinated’ initiatives into a coherent urban
Petroleum Products Regulator. Government Programme which will Strengthen local
We will renew the BBC’s Charter ina way 28 Parliament will have a stronger role to vality of oye’s i jobs and improve the which guarantees continuation of high-quality Work on the consumer's behalf. we mu helpquality Of people's ves.
‘‘gy I avai: consumers have a voice locally an:.
spectrum of programmes. The licence feecee brise Partnerships Wi employers» traceI:: unions and the community, which will remains the best way of financing the BBCand We will create a cleaner, mobilise the commitment and the enthusiasm
Cee wil ing its independence. A concessionary gafer environmentof local people. The composition and terms of
Re will be introduced for ali pensioners. The greatest challenge we face is the reference of urban development corporations: responsibility to ensure the survival of the will be changed immediately and they will in
As people have more leisure, they also need planet. due course be wound up in an orderly way. I better facilities for sport. We will encourage councils to invest in modern, well-staffedEconomic progress goes hand in hand withAt the local level, we will tackle litter and sports centres for the enjoyment of people of viconmental responsibility. Labour will graffiti and start to transform inner city all ages and abilities, and give mandatory rate ace the goal of sustainable development, _ environments by establishing neighbourhood relief to voluntary sports clubs. with environmental modernisation an integral action areas where local communities can
New facilities and better backing for people part of our industrial strategy. sree Nop their own plans for regenerating the with outstanding talent will help put Britain..:.;:: Labour’s Prime Minister will go to the wine en ee ee ee Earth Summit in June, with a commitment to Clean water, healthy
Councils and make football grounds safe for stabi ang) ae their l99O levels by the food; spectators. We will stop the wanton sale of ° 8! Otw: ink shoal playing fields a ensure that sport €nd of the decade and a recognition that ee unsure that tthe highest Rareneee takes its proper place within the significant cuts will be needed ” the early standards and end the dumping of industrial curriculum. years of the new century. We will adopt the- Tha‘.
tightest possible timetable for eliminating fundamental that i is 2 priority fon return ‘; We will protectOs in eo ther chemicals which deplete the public control. In the meantime, we will consumers°yer.; protect consumers against high prices and
Our Consumers’ Charter will cover all goodsOur tough pollution standards, based on POOF Service and give greater priority to and services. It will include: the health and safety of children, will be &"Vironmental problems. I gn i int tn Tb EL
ITyLabour’s independent Food Standards and crewed vessels, adding to Britain’s and ensure better treatment of farm animals
Agency will ensure high food quality security and reducing the cost to our balance and animals. in transit. Our national dog standards. Our Department of Food and of payments. registration scheme will provide the money
Farming will offer British farmers and. for a warden service.
consumers a better deal. Subsidies forAll transport services will be required to production will gradually be replaced with -_ meet high standards of service and safety, withAs part of our programme to outlaw cruelty green premium payments to promote effective avenues for complaint and to wild mammals, we will allow a free vote in environmentally sound management of the compensation where appropriate. We will the House of Commons on a proposal to ban countryside. establish a new independent transport safety _ the hunting of live quarry with hounds and, if inspectorate within the health and safety that is passed, provide parliamentary time for
We will invest in decent legislation to improve the safety environment the necessary legislation. There will be no new publi c transportwhich has led to the terrible tragedies of recentlimitations on the country sports of angling or years. Increased security measures and better _ shooting.
We will transform transport policy by staffing will be particularly welcome to ensuring, for the first time, that all road, women, elderly and disabled people.
railway, aviation,. shipping and inland waterways projects are judged on the basis of Saving energy their environmental, social and economic; as;
C opact Within six months we will review the Labour will give top priority to energy saving ads programme and mobilise private capital Tather than energy sales. We will set up an for large-scale public transport investment. Energy Efficiency Agency and a Renewable
All major transport projects will be subject to Energy Agency. We will require the gas and
Environment Impact Assessment and we will electricity companies to invest in insulation fully observe the requirements of the 4nd other energy-saving measures.
European Directive on EIAs. Road building;;; proposals for sensitive areas such as OxleasWe will not invest in new nuclear power
Wood and Twyford Down must be subject to Stations, continue with those in the planning full environmental assessment. process or extend the lives of existing nuclear stations beyond their safe life span. Britain’s
We reject Conservative plans to privatise dependence on nuclear power will therefore
British Rail. Instead, we will modernise, steadily diminish. We will use the most setting clear performance targets to improve Modern technology to deal with the problems
“the quality of service and shift more freight of decommissioning and nuclear waste.
from road to rail...
A better life in the
We will tackle the problem of congestion country and env ironmental damage by enabling local We will expand affordable housing in rural authorities to provide better quality transport..
We will end the deregulation of buses, °°» dev elop countryside colle Bes to, meetI
(_)troduce bus priority measures integrated wider training needs and invest in workshop sI with new rapid transit systems within a ‘green and small business units. We will support light’ programme designed to encourage meal schools and he. Ru, public veloneneny people to transfer to public transport. Proper Commission an d the Development Bo. ar d for concessionary fare schemes will be developedRural Wales will be boosted in every area. Traffic management schemes to.
cyeliste and. pedestrione Deiter facies forThe ecological richness of our countryside centres safer and more attractive. must be protected. We will give people a new right of access to open country, create new
We will reform transport taxation in order national Parks and step Up protection for to encourage smaller, cleaner cars and me usete way forward fo wh consult widely on the of catalytic con verters. The subsidy to countryside bodies, including independent company cars will be phased out. boards for all national parks. We will.. safeguard Britain’s rivers and canals and con nay te oe casts a year, Weimprove leisure facilities. Anglers will benefit will stop bus deregulation and privatisation offrom and contribute to our plans for improved
London Transport and promote efficient "V°T 4" ny:; public transport. We will protect animalsI
We. will seek to reverse the unacceptable We will reduce cruelty to animals within decline in Britain’s merchant navy and Britain and Europe. We will ban the testing of encourage the greater use of British-owned beauty aids on animals, outlaw fur farming,
22It ts time to modernise Britain’s democracy. Central to
Labour’s purpose in government is our commitment to radical constitutional reform.
C dur Charter of Rights, backed up by a powers to legislate for and administer In our first year, we will introduce a new complementary and democratically enforced Scotland’s domestic affairs and modernise Welsh Language Act. We will establish, in the bill of rights, will establish in law the specific I Scotland’s economy and the ability to _ lifetime of full Parliament, an elected Welsh rights of every citizen. represent Scotland within the United Assembly in Cardiff with powers and;;. Kingdom and Europe. functions which reflect the - existing
We will oan in pur a Parliamentaryadministrative structure. Local government session with a Freedom of Information Actar. iiR which will open up government to the peopleLabour’s legislation will be firmly basedon!" Wales will be reformed to create between 25
Exceptions rl be. tly drawn"the proposals agreed in the Scottish and 3O ‘most purpose’ authorities.
P8: Constitutional Convention. The Parliament
We will give power towill be elected on an Additional Member A regional tier of government in the English. System. It will be responsible for local regions will take over many powers now the nations and regions government, health, housing, education, exercised nationally, such as _ regional
We will move immediately to establish an transport, environmental and other policies economic planning and transport. These new elected Scottish Parliament. It will have within Scotland. administrations will later form the basis for he ee esoo y eer ae ee: a a ie: ss Soesa. es PRB: se ae ie i es a ed \ oe iI oe See Pee eepool) ae’‘, lwae aRe oe a Ae ee ee fa:, elected regional governments. To simplifyWe will work with the legal profession to The black and ethnic local government in England, we will, open up new opportunities to women and to minority communiti establish ‘most purpose’ authorities generally’ ~ black and ethnic minority groups, and create, ities based on district councils. In some areas, a an independent judicial appointments We are determined to ensure that women and.. peJPP...
county-wide authority or the amalgamation of I commission. A Sentencing Council will bring men from ethnic minority groups are full and districts may be more appropriate. We will some consistency into what is now often a equal members of the community.
consult widely before finalising proposals. haphazard process. A Court Inspectorate will.
improve the efficiency of our often outdated AS well as strengthening the race
London is now the only European capital _ judicial system. discrimination laws and extending the powers without the advantage of its own electedof the Commission for Racial Equality, we will authority. Labour will give Londoners theEuro for om as throughout the right to elect a new Greater London Authority, We will offer-everyone a uropean Community. We will not tolerate responsible for making London a better place gag hrythe present level of racial harassment and to live and work. alr cnanceattacks, and will ensure that more effective
Stronger sex and race discrimination laws willContract compliance fo eatle lest ere.
ween omvustified. promote equal treatment. We will introduce a British their fair share of jobs.
€ wil remove unjustilied restrictions on new law dealing with discrimination on A fair citizenship law
C broadcasting and establish an urgent enquiry -_ grounds of sexuality, repeal the unjust Clauseas ad by the Monopolies and Mergers Commission 28 and allow a free vote in the House of Wé will introduce fair immigration and into the concentration of media ownership. If I Commons on the age of consent. citizenship laws which restore the right to the press fail to deal with abuses of individualBritish citizenship for every child born in iii. Britain. laws, whi i iscrimi
Privacy, we will implement the CalcuttIn order to safeguard the rights of people main eo eee which will not discriminate
Report’s recommendations for statutory. ee:;-on grounds of sex or race, will respect the right. with disabilities, we will appoint a Ministeros:
protection.:: to family life. A new Act will guarantee
Ifor the Disabled and extend anti-. f
Idiscrimination laws to cover this group. Sanctuary tO genuine relugees but prevent
Individuals must be able to control personalbogus applications for asylum. I: information about themselves. We will...; _.: strengthen Britain’s Data Protection Act inWe will establish a Children’s MinisterWe are determined to see that equally fair line with European practice. The security within the Home Office to coordinate policies laws apply throughout the European services will be brought under the scrutiny of for children across departments. One © Community and will oppose any attempt to
Ia Parliamentary Select Committeeindependent Children’s Commissioner will remove voting rights from Commonwealth
I, promote the interests of all children. citizens in European elections.;... Protecting children will be high on the
IWe will see that justice agenda, as will the full implementation of the Northern Ireland
Iis doneChildren Act and the UN Convention to Labour will continue the present talks on
There is widespread concern about the Promote childrens rights. Northern Ireland. In the long term, we want miscarriages of justice which have imprisonedto see a united Ireland achieved by consensus
(_ innocent people. As part of our sweeping- sand without I violence. We support the programme of law reform, we will establish an Labour’s Ministry forcommitment in the Anglo-Irish Agreement additional appeals tribunal, including ay Womenthat ‘any change in the status of Northern members as well as lawyers, to examine the; Ireland would only come about with the most contentious convictions. The Police and Following the successful example of France, consent ofa majority in Northern Ireland’. We
Criminal Evidence Act will be reformed. Getmany and many other countries, Labour __ will work within the agreement to achieve ourI
Convictions will no longer be possible on will appoint a Cabinet Minister for Women. policy of unity by consent, and strengthen uncorroborated confession evidence. She will ensure that women’s voices are heard -_ measures against injustice, discrimination andI at the highest level. She will monitor the work deprivation. I
We will improve access to legal aid and, of all other departments and coordinate;; when resources allow, extend it to tribunal 2ction for equal opportunities across ‘We will fight terrorism by every lawful - I hearings. We will encourage the expansion of I 8OVernment. means, repealing the counter-productive Prevoluntary advice centres and invest in bettervenuon of Terrorism Act and replacing it with support for victims. We will appoint from the _‘The Ministry will also initiate legislation for % measure which is moe effective and genHouse of Commons a Minister for Legal women. In particular, we will introduce a new “Minely accepta € in a democratic society.
Administration, who will initially be part of I Sex Equality Act which will combine and the Lord Chancellor’s Department. We will. strengthen the current equal pay and sex A modern Parliament go on to create a Department of Legal discrimination laws.. Westminster must become more effective in
Administration headed by a Minister in the; protecting citizens and holding government toI
Commons who will be responsible for all The Ministry for Women will have special. account. We will therefore improve the courts and tribunals in England and Wales. _ responsibility for ‘coordinating childcare procedures and facilities. of the House of
Future reform of the distinctive Scottish legal." policy, improving women’s “ safety.. and Commons,.: strengthen scrutiny of ECI system will be. the responsibility of the encouraging more women to participate in - legislation, and end ministerial misuse of the
Scottish Parliament. S public life. LeL, Royal Prerogative.
24ys Eeefe Steupon all political donations, made: by, public wy eeoeIeeeOpe Se as companies, require donations: Ao political NOE BS Bg or a er gn ee ee parties to be declared in a public register,
Irequire the accounts of political parties to be published and, as recommended by the
Houghton Report, introduce state aid for political parties.
Further constitutional reforms will include those leading to the replacement of the House of Lords with a new elected Second Chamber which will have the power to delay, for the lifetime of a Parliament, change to designated legislation reducing individual or constitutional rights.
We will continue to encourage a wide andI well-informed public debate on the electoralI
Cysem. The working party on electoral ystems which we established in opposition under the distinguished chairmanship of
Professor Raymond Plant will continue its work with an extended membership and enhanced authority and report to the next
Labour government.
This general election was called only after months of onagain, off-again dithering which damaged our economy and weakened our democracy. No government with a majority should be allowed to put the interests of party above country as the Conservatives have done. Although an early election willI sometimes be necessary, we will introduce as aI general rule a fixed parliamentary term.
IjI
III
IIWe need a new government to grasp new opportunities.
A Labour government ready to exploit Britain’s unique, interlinking membership of the United Nations Security
Comme NATO, the Commonwealth, the European ommunity and the G7.
It’s a new chance tofour former Soviet nuclear republics, together _to peace and stability. The Tory government enhance peace in thewith France and China. Until elimination of contributed to proliferation when it permitted worldthose stocks is achieved, Labour will retain the supply of nuclear weapons material to
Britain’s nuclear capability, with the number Saddam Hussein. The Labour government
Labour, which in opposition joined our of warheads no greater than the present will work in the United Nations for a
NATO allies in rejecting the Conservative total. strengthened nuclear non-proliferation treaty, government’s cold war nostalgia, will inbacked by meaningful sanctions and by a government partner the United States in With the increase in major nuclear powers comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty. We negotiating to reduce the world’s stocks of from five to eight, proliferation isa dangerous _will in addition work for a global ban on nuclear weapons. We shall seek to involve the _ reality and may become an even greater threat chemical and biological weapons and stronger
Me a “.\ '.. BAAR oesir
”’;,: HS SBRcontrols to prevent proliferation of ballisticThe Labour government will set up a in the Foreign: and: Commonwealth Office, missiles. Meanwhile, we will join Russia in Defence Diversification Agency to assist and require all Britain’s diplomatic. posts ending nuclear tests. workers, communities and companies abroad to appoint an officer to monitor human affected by change. The agency will ensure rights. There will be an annual report to
We will actively support the peace-making _ that resources made available by reductions in Parliament, Decisions on economic aid and role of the UN - for example, in Cambodiaand defence spending - reductions already arms sales will be linked to human rights
Somalia - and work for a permanent United _ planned by the Conservative government-are _ records.
Nations peace-keeping force. used in the first instance for rebuilding and investing in our manufacturing base. From
It’s a new chance tothe fruits of this investment can stem finance it’s a new chance to win solve lon grunningfor health and the social services. friends abroad disputesLabour will end Tory government meddling
The Labour government will work in the it’s a new chance forain the valuable work of the British Council.
and self-determination for the Palestinians, OU" of the European second division into Waite and Mikhail Gorbachev, and for the ere must be strict control on arms sales to which our country has been relegated by the ~- BBC’s World Service Television Service.
Cc}: Tories. Our first chance will be the United
© region. Kingdom’s six-months’ presidency of the
Labour will work in the United Nations, the Community, starting on l July. We shall use [ts a new chance to
Commonwealth, the European Community that presidency to end the Tories’ opt-out fight world hunger and
4fi the Social Chapter, so that the British and NATO to help bring about the peacefulrompret, overty reunification of Cyprus, on the federal basis people can benefit from European safeguards.; oo.
advocated by the sovereign government of We will also use our presidency to helpensure Under the Tories, Britain’s aid budget has
Cyprus. The Labour government will make that poorer countries are not disadvantaged as been cut to its lowest ever. The Labour itself available to our friends in India and a result of the Single Market. government will aim to meet the United
Pakistan to assist in achieving a negotiatedWe shall pl. ti‘atiNa tons aid target of O.7 per cent of GNP solution to the problem of Kashmir that is€ shal’ Piay an active part in negotiations within five years - th € lifetime of a full acceptable to all the people of Kashmir - on Economic and Monetary Union. We shall Parliament. Labour will establish a separate
Moslems. Hindus and Buddhistsfight for; Britain’s interests, working for Department of State for International
>. Europe-wide policies to fight unemployment Development, whose Minister will be in the
We will, as a matter of urgency, discuss with ane na jpahane ' regional ane aren Cabinet.;4industrial policy.
Hong Kong's ae emoctney what wnfidence ministers of the different countries mustTackling poverty will be the top priority of may est ennane © five, temo ini con As. of become the effective political counterpart to our aid programme. We will make aid more an ritain Ss Hive Femaining yeathe central bank whose headquarters should effective, work more closely with nonresponsibility for the colony. be in Britain. governmental agencies, put women at the
“tayheart of our programme and, in coordination
Cit Ss a new chance toAs part of the evolving role of the regions of -_ with other donors, reduce the share of tied aid.
provide genuineEurope, we yn establish 2 Scottish Labour will promote environmentally representative office in Brussels and see sustainable development and encourage new security for Britainappropriate representation for the Scottish approaches to reduce Third World debt. We
As the party which took Britain into NATO, parliament in European institutions. We shall will restore funding for development
Labour es base is defence polis crovide seek fundamental changes in the wasteful education in the UK.
membership of the alliance. Weice Common Agricultural Policy. Savings can whatever fe esources are a for iltectve help finance other Community projects. We will promote greater and fairer trade for elence for our country, Providing ther countries, to enable their economies to necessary level of forces with the appropriateWe shall make the widening of the prow and diversify. UN and European equipment and weapons. Community a priority, and shall advocate Community action to help the world’s poor... speedy admission for Austria, Sweden, must become more effective. Labour will take. Unlike the Tories, we recognise that Finland and Cyprus, whose membership - Britain back into UNESCO.
disarmament negotiations and technological applications have been or are about to be change can bring about problems for our jogged. We shall seek to create conditions in The Labour government will work within defence industries. Nearly lOO, OOO jobs have - which, at the appropriate time, the new the G7 and the European Community to win already been lost during the past two yearsand democracies of Central and Eastern Europe support for a New Marshall Plan to assist the l23, OOO more are in danger, can join the Community. former communist countries of Central and
Selling more arms to poor countries is notTaecbltity a those of the exSovier on “by
“ ce ans or cfiective way of ‘letop sal. It’s a new chance forshortages and discontent, could be as great a ritain's delence industries. We withreat to world peace as the armed
Ito countries which might use them for internal human rights;. communism that hae now disappeared.
Irepression or international aggression. Labour will set up a Human Rights Division '27 Iaa aeit’s a new chance for
Britain in the.: reI
CommonwealthThe Tories have regarded the Commonwealth as a wearisome obligation. Labour believes that this unique inter-racial and interhemispheric organization can play a central role in fighting racism, hunger and human rights violations. We shall play an active part in the Commonwealth and join the South,;.
Africa Committee of Foreign Ministers which:
the Tories have boycotted.
It’s a new chance to:
safeguard the ewe ronment he Tories have been laggardly and reluctant in international moves to protect our planet’s environment. Labour will set the pace in pressing for international action to safeguard the ozone layer, to combat acid rain, to tackle the problem of global warming, to face up to the environmental needs of the poorest people of the world. We will scrap the Tory government’s opt-out on European
Community environmental _ protection measures and deadlines. Labour will adamantly oppose any attempts to permit commercial expoitation of the virgin continent of Antarctica.
I wish to become a member of The Labour Party.,
BLOCK CAPITALS PLEASE. Tick as applicable..:.:
SurnameTitleTenclose an extra [ff towards et ees campaigning donation oflocal campaigning
MF.
Fem (RTE ] cteiggtmtomiernie J
“The Labour Party” tothe valueof
Visa/, iners Club.
cnnLLITTTT TTT ttt tiie
Countyponeode [_[ TT JLT I.
Your full postcode is essential) I l wish to pay by Curect Debit. Please send deuails.
Date of birth. Telephone number.~ acetate [aDas: and constitution of
I Trade union (if eligible): the Labour Party. "Send this form to: Membership
Annual membership subscription [7] £l5 ordinary [7] £5 reducedProcessing, The Labour Party, Labour "I Ifreduced, I am: (7) unwaged [Jon a training scheme: FREEPOS TBR evan Road; od
(Cstudent (7) retired [l] in paid employment less than l6 hours per week., SL Be if you use one it will save us money).;; l) £lO trade union (if union is affiliated to the Labour. Party). rn:; VA
ESE Iif the Conservatives can’t get it right after l3 years, they never will. II
It’s time for a change.
It’s time to get Britain.
working again - Labour's general election manifesto - tells you how a new Labour
Igovernment will modernise Industry, transform the NHS, raise education
C$tandards and make families better off.
It’s time to get Britain working again sets out
Labour’s programme for national recovery - theI immediate action which a Labour governmentI will take to get the economy out of recession. I
It’s time to get Britain working again explainsI how Labour will pay for-
© its programme and cutI taxes for nine out of tenI families.:
It's time to get Britain working again - essential reading for every voter. I
Labour
Cedar SEA? LIT ona printed by Bl Pans (U8 doers Le, I
SEN losers? pee Herts CM23 2NN. I tn i