IIFOR BRITAIN I
THE BEST FUTUREI apoe oeI aSigg ta *;
¢ oe iONCERVAMANIFESTO l992I eoTHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN III
THE CONSERVATIVE MANIFESTO l992 (ZA)
Published by Conservative Central Office
___ 32 Smith Square, Westminster, London SWlP 3Ha I
IPrinted by Bemrose U. K. Lad, Weyagoose Drive, Derby DE2 6XGS, II a aeTHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN ryA ACC LR eT
FOREWORD
At the end of this Parliament a new Millennium will be in view. We must raise our sights high. This
IManifesto is about making our country respected and secure, and helping you achieve a better, safer and more prosperous future. For I believe - strongly - that you, and not the Government, should be in charge of your life. That’s what Conservatism stands for. That principle underlies all the policies in this Manifesto.
I believe in a responsible society. Government’s they would. They just needed encouragement, duties are clear: to protect Britain in a dangerous _incentive and a system that is outward-looking too.
world; to look after those who cannot look afterIt is all£lution in quality;.
themselves; to protect law-abiding people fromB is h Lee of a revolution in quality in Britain.
crime and disorder; and to protect the value of ourot 8 be vad on Thee. Minning in the toughest currency - without which al spending pledges arebe arkets a libe ‘ted from is new vigour in the worthless and all savings at risk. usinesses liberatem state ownership; better management and better industrial relations. These O
But I believe also ina society in which governmentare the firm foundations of economic recovery, doesn’t try to take responsibility away from people. We are raising the quality of our education and
Politicians must never make the mistake of thinkingtraining. We are raising the standard of our housing, the state always knows best, or that it is entitled to 3. more people own and improve their own homes the lion’s share of people’s money. I believe inlow We are concerned for the quality of our environment.
taxes not just because they ignite enterprise - the And in government, we are leading a drive for quality spark of economic growth - but because they putthroughout our public services power and choice where it belongs: in your hands.,
That, I believe, is the way we all want to live - a decent
So when you compare what the politicians are saying _life in a civilised community. That is the way we can in this election, ask yourself these questions. Whomlive: celebrating our achievements, not nurturing old do you trust to take responsibility for Britain’sgrudges; enjoying our successes, not talking Britain defence; to keep us sake and strengthen our down. We can be free of old prejudices and class influence for good? And who, at the same time, _ barriers. We can encourage diversity, not division; wants to give you the opportunity to do your best forachievement, not antagonism. We can all make our yourself and your family? own contribution to the success of the United
Who will give you the power to choose - to say forKingdom; and we must keep that kingdom united.
yourself what you want? And who will give you the You know I believe in choice. And in this election, as personal prosperity that comes from low taxes- from _ always, there is another choice. You can vote for ourO our own savings, your own pension, your own opponents, and watch them take Britain back to the home? Who will let you build up your own stake in l97Os. Back to socialism. Back to strikes. Back to
Britain’s success - and pass it on to your children? strife. Back to the world’s pity, or worse still,.. contempt. I don’t believe Britain wants that. I know
Only Conservatives can truly claim to be the pattyof the world doesn’t want that for Britain.
opportunity; choice; ownership and responsibility.;.
Socialists like to keep people under the l hope you will choose a different path - to go government’s thumb. Conservatives want to give _ forward, not back; to go for the best, knowing that them independence. But we also want to put Britain can be the best and do it best. My belief is government at your service, giving you what you'veclear. Only the best is good enough for Britain.
paid for - good public services, responsible to you.
I do not believe the answer to every problem is simply for government to dig deeper in your pocket. I believe it often lies inging the way government.
works; in making it respond to you. Governmentu/ should look outwards. It should listen. It should put you in the know, not keep you in the dark.
We have made quite a start, under the seal of the
Citizen’s Charter. People in schools, hospitals, public offices of all kinds are rising to the challenge. I knew: CONTENTS eee
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY FOR BRITAINThe need for leadershipl
Our influence for good2I
The risks we face now2!
Our armed forces3
The European Community3I
() WEALTH AND OWNERSHIPBritain’s opportunity5I
Inflation and Europe6I
The route to lower taxes6
The right to own7I
Setting the economy free8I
Privatisation9I
Energy, science and innovationlOI
Regional policies and small businessesllI
Consumer affairs! l2I, ee
~CHOICE AND THE CHARTERThe Citizen’s Charterl3
©The Post Officel4
Whitehall & Westminsterl5
OPPORTUNITY FOR ALLSchools, pupils & parentsl7I
Teachingl8
After l6l8I
Higher educationl9I
The training revolutionl9
Workers and unions2OI
Women and opportunity2l
IIa'ee
FREEDOM UNDER LAWPolice and the community22
Protectors and victims23
Penalties and prevention23
Reforming our prisons24
Our legal system24
Pornography, privacy, libel25
Community relations25
Immigration and refugees26
The danger of drugs26
The threat of terrorism26 O eee
RESPONSIBILITY FOR OTHERSThe NHS - present and future27
Care services29
Children29
Social security29
Disabled people3l
The voluntary sector3l
Animal welfare32
A BRIGHTER BRITAINHomes and housing33
Transport35
Local government37
Cities38
London;4O
The countrysideI4O O
Farming, forestry and fishing4l
The environment43
TOWARDS THE MILLENNIUMMillennium Fund44
Arts44
Sport45
Our heritage45
Broadcasting46
A UNITED KINGDOM: The Union47
Scotland _47
Wales48
Northern Ireland49
YOUR CHOICE AT THIS ELECTION5OI
THE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAINI
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY FOR BRITAINI, I
The world has been transformed in recent years. Communism has collapsed in Eastern Europe, andI the Soviet Union has fallen apart. Everywhere Socialism is in retreat and democracy, human rightsI and market economics are advancing. The authority of the UN has been bolstered and Iraqi} aggression seen off. Talks are under way in the Middle East and South Africa. It is a time of greatI opportunity, but also of new dangers. I
Britain needs firm leadership at this time. We must be represented by a team of quality and experience. AI team which can help shape the world for the next century. A Conservative team. I
Under the Conservatives, Britain has regained hereconomic and humanitarian aid to ease the transition. rightful influence in the world. We have stood up forto a market economy.
COthe values our country has always represented. We have defended Britain's interests with vigour and with success. m We will support an enhanced role for the
The respect with which Britain is regarded in the worldUN in peace-keeping and combatingI has rarely been higher. We play a central part in worldstate-sponsored terrorism. I affairs as a member of the European Community, mw We are determined that Iraq should comply
NATO, the Commonwealth and the Group of 7with the terms of the Gulf War cease-fireI leading industrial countries, and as a Permanentagreement, and in particular that it should
Member of the UN Security Council. No otherco-operate with the UN in dismantling its country holds all these positions. weapons of mass destruction. I
We are taking a leading role in recasting all the mainm We support early Russian membership international institutions to which we belong: theof the IMF and World Bank, as well as a
United Nations, the European l Community, NATO, stabilisation fund for the rouble. I and the Commonwealth. e Prime Minister:.
convened the first ever meeting of the UN Security. We are reer hele with > fo P ee Sa $ toI
Council at Heads of Government level. Betweenprovide urgep€ Tormer Soviet now and the end of l992 there will be seven SummitsUnion and Eastern Europe to upgrade the where issues of critical importance to our future willsafety of their nuclear power stations.
C)be determined: two EC Councils, at Lisbon anda We strongly support the peace process in
-Edinburgh, the G7 Summit, the CSCE Summit, ECthe Middle East. The outcome of the
Summits with the US and Japan, and the Earthtalks must safeguard the security ofI
Summit at Rio de Janeiro. Britain will be at the centreIsrael and achieve self-determination for of these negotiations. the people of the occupied territories.. &a We will safeguard the prosperity of Hong
_ THE NEED FOR LEADERSHIPKong, nuture democratic institutions andI
The end of the Cold War has enabled the UN to actwork with a ‘hej © caverment t within with new unity and authority. Under the authority of...
the UN, British forces played a leading andm We seek a solution to the dispute which courageous part in the Gull War and the liberationhas divided Cyprus since l974. A of Kuwait. At the Prime Minister’s instigation, thesettlement must recognise that Cyprus isI
UN also backed the operation to protect the Kurds. indivisible and that the rights of bothI
Britain has led the world in helping the reforms in thesupport the UN's effort. ‘oe ecure ‘ fairI former Soviet Union. The Prime Minister gave full::..:”and lasting solution.; and immediate support to President Yeltsin in the. I
August coup attempt, and was the first WesternThe problems of Kashmir cannot beI leader to visit Moscow after the coup failed. Britainresolved by violence. We urge both India has led the way in building up relations with theand Pakistan to address and resolve theI republics of the new Eommonwealth ofissue, and we stand ready to help. I
Independent States. We have provided valuableTHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAINI.
--III
L. I ff OUR INFLUENCE FOR GOODI;; a We will promote the English language byI
All over the world countries are turning to democracystrengthening both the British CouncilI and free markets. Last October in Harare, theand the BBC World Service. We willI
Commonwealth took on a new role as a promoter ofencourage both to become moreI democracy, the rule of law, and respect for individualentrepreneurial in order to finance their freedoms. Already the Commonwealth is monitoringactivities in developing markets. I elections to ensure that they are free and fair. BritainI is taking the lead in encouraging these trends.2 THE RISKS WE FACE NOWI
We give substantial aid to the relief of poverty and to4
~ help the struggling economies of the developing The collapse of the old Soviet Union has dramatically
Cyworld. Our aid programme next year (excluding aidvindicated Conservative defence policy. We have to Eastern Europe and the CIS) will teach £l,8OOalways put the security of our country first. We haveI million. Britain also makes more direct privateept the peace by staying strong.
investment in the developing world than any other Today the threat of a massive surprise attack fromI
EC country - some £2,4OO million in l989. We are Eastern Europe has gone. But we still face grave risks urging the international community to take decisive -_to our security. We cannot drop our guard. Under the action on debt relict the liberalisation of world tradeConservatives, Britain will never do so. I and support tor good government. Within the former Soviet Union there remains a hu
We continue to accept the long term UN target formilitary force. Democracy and the rule of law are yet aid of O.7 per cent of GNP although we cannot seta _to be firmly established. Control over these armedI timetable for its achievement. The quality of forces and the massive nuclear capability isI
Britain’s overseas aid programme is second to none. uncertain. The events in Yugoslavia show what canI
It is well targeted and highly effective. Eighty perhappen when Communism collapses in disorder. I cent of our bilateral aid goes to the poorest countries. Increasingly, threats come from outside Europe - asI
New aid to the poorest is given as grants, not loans. we saw so clearly in the Gulf. Many more countriesI
W,.. designedbuildare acquiring large stocks of modern arms. Some are c are supporting projects designed to butrying to obtain nuclear, biological and chemicalI efficient institutions and accountable government. weapons. Britain must be able to respond to anyI
TMWe are helping to improve public administration and'I
C }:. unexpected danger. I
-the legal system in a number of countries. The Céthe only party wh.
Ie Conservatives are the only party who recognise
The English language is one of our nation’s greatest -_ both the opportunities and the threats of the new world.
assets - cultural politically ane commercially TheFor over forty years, our security has been basedI
BBC World Service has unriv: i standing vulur, \firmly on NATO, the most successful defensive the globe. The British Council acts ich I culturaalliance ever. We will work with our allies to ensure ambassador for Britain and for the English language. -_t,4l NATO remains the comerstone of our defence.
We williddBritain will command a new NATO Rapid ReactionI "wevent ove neibl a a eae wolttee_ Corps ready to deploy quickly to counter any suddenI government, sensible economic policies, threat. As Europeans we must accept a greater role the rooting out of corruption, and -in safeguarding the peace in our continent. I crucially - respect for human rights and the". I
We will promote arms control and. reduction rule of law. initiatives. On Britain’s initiative, the UN isI a We will press creditor countries to acceptestablishing a register of arms transfers in order toI the Prime Minister's proposal. themonitor any dangerous arsenals of weapons.
trinidad Terms; fora swo-thirds reductionBritain has always been strongly opposed to nuclearI
TM <° Clal debt of the poorest countries. proliferation. We will back an enhanced role for theI a We will promote the development of multi-International Atomic nergy Agency in dnspectingI party systems througe newnuclear sites and tor the‘ ecurity Council in
Westminster Foundation for Democracy. acting against those nations which break their nonproliferation obligations. ITAKING RESPONSIBILITY FOR BRITAIN aeee account of the changing world situation. In future a We will work to strengthen the Westernour Forces will be smaller, but better equipped. Our
European Union as the European pillar ofServices deserve the excellent pay and conditions
NATO. We will press for a Europeanwhich we have secured for them and will maintain.
reaction force.
m We will intensify the coordination of seca We will complete the deployment of the urity policies within the Twelve. next generation of Britain’s minimum mw We will work through the CSCE tonuclear deterrent. We will order and safeguard the security of Europe. complete the fourth Trident submarine.
« We will support a comprehensive ands We will ensure the Forces have the best verifiable ban on chemical weapons, andand most modern equipment. OC) further controls on the export of itemsWe will improve the quality and which could be used in making biologicalmanagement of service housing and help weapons. those in the Forces save towards buying mw We will help Russia in her efforts toa home of their own.
dismantle nuclear weapons. u The Reserves will play an even more important role and we will introduce
>legislation to allow their more flexible a OUR ARMED FORCESuse.
Only the Conservatives can be trusted to maintain the quality and capability of our Armed Forces. WeLP are proud of the skill, courage and professionalismDa THE EUROPEAN COMMUNITY which they displayed in the Gulf and which they. to.
show daily in Northern Ireland. The Conservatives have been the party of Britain in;. Europe for 3O years. We have argued when argument
We are the only party unambiguously committed to -_ was necessary; but we have not wavered nor changed the preservation and modernisation of our our views. We have ensured that Britain is at the heart independent nuclear deterrent. of Europe; a strong and respected partner. OQ
Our defence would be unsafe in the hands of the - We have played a decisive part in the development of opposition parties. Labour have opposed our the Community over the past decade. It was a British defence policies at every turn. They have twisted and _ initiative which launched the Single Market programme turned in their attitude to our nuclear deterrent. and our insistence which reformed the Community’s
They would devastate our conventional forces by -__ finances. Britain has promoted cooperation on foreign cuts of at least 27 per cent, which would lead to hugepolicy and in combating terrorism. Britain has also job losses in the defence industries. persuaded our partners to welcome new countries who
The Liberal Democrats would cause even more apply for Community membership.
damage to Britain's defences. Their aimistocutour The Maastricht Trboth for Britain defence spending by half by the end of the decade. and for the test of Europe. “Buitish proposals helped
_ We insist that our forces have the modern, effectiveto shape the key provisions of the Treaty, including equipment that they need. The Gulf War showed -_ those strengthening the enforcement of Community that the Services must have the latest technology to __‘law, defence, subsidiarity and law and order. But give them maximum flexibility and mobility That is Britain refused to accept the damaging Social why we have ordered the new Challenger I tank for Chapter proposed by other Europeans,. and it was the Army, the Merlin helicopter for the Navy, the excluded from the Maastricht treaty.
ASRAAM air defence missile forthe RAF andawide al) Member States must live up to their obligations range of other new equipment for our Forces. under Community law. At Maastricht, we secured
Our reappraisal of Britain’s defence needs will result agreement that the European Court will be able to in a major restructuring of our Armed Forces to takefine any Member State which fails to do so.
IbY;. I
THE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN. III a We will work closely with our partners inOur priorities will be: I foreign policy and in the war on_.. I!
international crime. a To start negotiations with those EFTA countries who want to join the CommunityI a We will continue to resist changes to theso that they can join by l995. I
Rome
Preaty businecs, that would damge@ To build on the EC’s AssociationI
Agreements with Czechoslovakia, I a We will resist Commission initiativesHungary and Poland so that we canI which run counter to the principle thatwelcome them to full membership by theI
CO)issues should be dealt with on a nationalyear 2OOO.
~~basis wherever possible.
m To conclude EC trade and cooperation m Britain is a great trading nation. Weagreements with the main republics of prosper through the maintenance of anthe former Soviet Union.
open trading system. We will work for a.
successful outcome to the GATTa To complete the single market andI negotiations. extend it ic the seven countries of EVTA. I erour trade ts with the rest of the a We will redouble our efforts to reformCommunity. The single market willI the Common Agricultural Policy andcreate an open market of 35O millionI will stoutly defend the interests ofcustomers for British goods and
British farmers and consumers. services. To complete the single marketI a We will insist on more effective controlwe shall aim to:
over Community spending and will;- open up the market for life insuranceI ' resist pressure to extend Communityto free competition; I. Competence O mew areas:~ liberalise air travel to bring down air w We will work to strengthen the externalfares in Europe closer to those in ofrontiers of the Community whilstAmerica; I
©)maintaining the checks needed at our. I own borders against illegal immigration,- free up the shipping and road transport drugs, terrorism and disease. markets so that British operators canI carry freely within the EC; I
- increase competition in the
European energy sector. I uDm We will provide guidance and help to anyI
Da THE BRITISH PRESIDENCYBritish company encountering a trade
In the second half of l992 Britain will take the Chairbarrier illegal under European law. I of the Council of Ministers. The British Presidencya We will press for progress on theI comes at a turning point in the Community’s history. environment, including the Fifth
It gives us the opportunity to shape the direction ofEnvironment Action Programme. I the Community and to establish its priorities. Weoo._ shall use it to promote our vision of an outwardm We will chair the negotiations on the looking Community based on free enterprise. future spending priorities. of the ommunity to ensure value for money.
Our Presidency will reach its climax at the EdinburghWe will ” safepuard the abatementI meeting of the European Council, which we will holdnegotiated by Mrs Thatcher which hasI in the historic palace of Holyrood House. While theso far brought some £l2, OOO million in attention of Europe is focused on Edinburgh, thebudget rebates to Britain. I strength of our Union will be visible to all., I aoTHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN
WEALTH AND OWNERSHIP
The l99Os present a great economic opportunity for Britain. We have got the scourge of inflation under control. We have cut direct tax rates. And a stable currency gives industry a chance to realise the potential released by the reforms of the l98Os.
We have extended ownership more widely - of homes, savings and shares - with millions more sharing directly in Britain’s success. We will promote enterprise through low taxes, sound money and a stable currency.
When the Exchange Rate Mechanism was beingL fl BRITAIN’S OPPORTUNITY; created, during the final days of the last Labourwhhers of: CO)
Government, the then Prime Minister decided€ are now members Of:
Britain could not take part.- The biggest free market in the world. British industry is again respected in Europe.
It was easy to see why. The economy was too weak._f low inflation. in whi
Inflation was too high. In l97479, the inflation rateA zone O ilow inflation, in which we can compete averaged over l5 per cent. It peaked at 27 per cent._,.
Public borrowing rose to nearly lO per cent of Britain must not throw this opportunity away by, national income - equivalent to £55, OOO million ¢lecting a Labour government. The world recession today. Penal taxes blunted enterprise. Britain was a _‘has been tough for all of us, at home and abroad.
byword for strikes. Unemployment has risen. But in Britain we have laid the foundations for recovery. What is needed to
The Conservatives have changed all that. Since l979, trigger confidence and growth is a Conservative our inflation rate has averaged 7, per cent. Now it Victory with a decisive majority. What would is only just over 4 per cent - below the average for thepostpone recovery, and turn this promise of growth
European Community. In the l96Os and l97Os, into the certainty of hard times, is the election of our
Britain had the slowest growth rate in the European OPponents whose policies would mean higher taxes,
Community. But in the l98Os, we grew faster thanhigher inflation, higher interest fates, more either France or Germany. Industrial disputesbureaucratic regulation and more strikes. C) became rare events. And in l99O, a Conservative t joined the ERM.
Government joined theIn the l99Os, the Government’s task will be
Penal taxes have been abolished. A man on averageto provide an terotice othe ainan which earnings, with a wife and two children, has an income svoeperny, Our erprise - t be ° today which after tax and inflation is 39 per centprosperity. Jur alms must be:
higher than it was in Labour’s last year. That greata To achieve price stability.
advance in the standard of living is at risk in thism To keep firm control over public election. spending.
Since the war, living standards have always risenm To continue to reduce taxes as fast as we faster under Conservative Governments than underprudently can.
Labour. Now we are pledged to cut tax rates again -w To make sure that market mechanisms and have made a start on the road to 2Op Income Tax. and incentives are allowed to do their job. I
Corporate tax rates have been cut, too. Our business.
investment has increased more rapidly than in any. a other major economy except Japan. Britain attracts Price stability does not mean a frozen economy in which by far the biggest share of Japanese and American _no price ever moves, But we must drive inflation down investment in Europe. That, too, is at risk in thisso low that it no longer affects the decisions made by election. ordinary people, businesses and government.
Sn enTHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN
Cee ee
III
When inflation rises, so do bankruptcies. When _same conditions - no more, no less. We will play our inflation falls, industry can plan again fora profitable full part in the discussions of the monetary future. Inflation creates strife, as different groups ininstitutions Europe may create in the l99Os. But we society struggle to restore their living standards. Itare not obliged to join in a single currency if we doI destroys jobs. It erodes savings and social benefitsnot want to. I and threatens our currency. I a In due course, we will move to the; ba INFLATION AND EUROPEnarrow bands of the ERM. I m We will play our full part in the design
OC) Membership of the ERM is now central to ourand discussion of monetary institutionsI
-’ eounter-inflation discipline. But the ERM is not afor Europe.
magic wand. It would not protect Labour; it wouldWhen or if other members of the ECI merely expose the folly of Labour policies. Somemove to a monetary union with a single
Labour politicians know that all too well - otherscurrency, we will take our oon simply don’t. They - and some of the unions - wouldunfettered decision on whether to join.
put irresistible spending pressure on a LabourThat decision will be taken by the United government. Kingdom Parliament. I
Some members of the European Community areI anxious to hurry on from the ERM to Economic and
Monetary Union. Others have doubts. Quite apart -.
from the constitutional issues, they do not want to4 THE ROUTE TO LOWER TAXES take risks with what is being achieved in the ERM..., I
Economic growth is created by people’s hard work,
The Treaty negotiated at Maastricht laid down the ingenuity, thrift and willingness to take risks. AnI process under which the Community can, if its enterprise economy rewards the industrious and members meet certain economic conditions, create athrifty. We believe that government should not gobble monetary union with a single currency for some or allup all the proceeds of growth, and that those who of them. Together with Germany, we fought for -_ create prosperity should enjoy it, through lower taxes
< ) tough criteria. We believe a monetary union wouldand more opportunity to build up personal wealth. I
-collapse, with damaging consequences, if it were. I imposed on economies that were too diverse. Our policy Is therefore i reduce the share efI i,.; national income taken by the public sector. In the
A union will only come about by l997 ifasubstantial -mid-l97Os, public spending peaked at over 49 per majority of Community members agree it should. It cent of our gross national product. In the early l98Os, would only include those members who were judged it peaked at over 47 per cent. In this recession, it is to have met specified conditions. And it would only peaking at only 43 per cent. We aim to reduce this come about if a majority of members were judged to -_gteadily as the recovery gets under way.
have done so.
But the Treaty goes on to say that monetary union willKeeping control of public spending will enable us to come about automatically in l999, for all who meet CUT faxes while bringing the Government's BudgetI the conditions. We did not want to exclude ourselves back towards balance in the years ahead. ExcessiveI from membership; but we could not accept such angovernment borrowing can lead to inflation. I automatic commitment. By the end of this decade theGovernment should always be on guard against that
EC’s membership will have changed; the economicdanger. However, when demand in the economy is performance of many of its members may haveweak, public borrowing will tend to rise. - changed. Ve cannot tell who the members of sucha Because companies pay taxes according to how well union might be.. they did the previous year, the deficit tends to beI
We therefore secured the freedom to make a properdeepest just as we come out of recession. We mustI judgement on events. We are as free to join if we wishmake sure that as the economy grows, borrowingI as any other member. We would have to meet theslows. I aIWEALTH AND OWNERSHIP
By bringing tax and spending decisions together ina I We are the only party that understands the need for unified Budget from next year, we will make thelow taxation. Labour and the Liberals openly choices clearer. But lower taxes and a prudentadvocate increased taxation. Yet lower taxes clearly approach to borrowing do not mean public spendingcreate a more productive economy. They also achieve must fall; quite the reverse. A lightly-taxed economy another prime objective of Conservative generates more economic growth, and more I Governments, which is to transfer power from the revenue. High taxes kill the goose that lays the _ state to the people.
golden eggs. In the course of its last five years in; office, Labour was forced to cut public spending, inLabour would:; real terms. By contrast, the Conservatives have been~ Reverse our cut in the starting rate of Income Tax able to raise public spending by nearly a quarter into 2Op.
real terms.- Raise the top rate. O
Higher tax rates do not always bring in more money. I - Abolish the National Insurance ceiling.
In practice, they can bring in less. The Conservative _ Introduce a new savings surch
Government has more than halved the top rate of. wings surcharge.
tax. Yet top rate taxpayers today provide a bigger share of our tax revenues than they did before. a We announced in the Budget an important
Lower taxes have encouraged more people to workfirst step towards a basic Income Tax rate harder - not to spend their time working out how toof 2Op. By applying a 2Op rate to the first avoid penal taxes.£2, OOO of taxable income, we have cut. oo. taxes for all 25 million taxpayers, and,
During the past l3 years we have cut, simplified ortaken the four million on lowest incomes abolished a whole range of direct taxes. out of 25p tax altogether.
- We have cut the basic rate of Income Tax froma We will make further progress towards a.33p to 25p, and the top rate from 83p to 4Op. basic Income Tax rate of 2Op.
- We have now announced a new starting Incomem We will reduce the share of national
Tax rate of 2Op. income taken by the public sector.
~ We have raised the basic single person's taxma We will see the budget return towardsO allowance by 27 per cent more than would bebalance as the economy recovers.
needed to keep pace with inflation.
‘ Ee)
~- We have simplified and reduced the burden of_ & taxation on capital. rif THE RIGHT TO OWN
- We have cut Corporation Tax from 52 percentto Since l979, wealth has been spread more widely
33 per cent (and from 42 per cent to 25 percent through the community. Home ownership, share for small companies). ownership and the buildup of personal pensions; have all contributed. Over two-thirds of people live
Insurance on low earners. shares, 6 million of them in newly-privatised
~ We have introduced independent taxation ofindustries. fe ae eee tae hen husbands and wives, giving married women fullonae5.
eligibility for tax allowances. And over 4¥, million people are now building up their own personal pensions.
~ We have introduced new tax incentives forBut these freedoms are at risk.
savings. Leboid ur would:
- We have abolished several taxes completely, oo, including the surcharge on income from savings, I - Halt the privatisation programme and threaten the National Insurance Surcharge, Developmentthe value of shares in privatised industries with
Land Tax, and Capital Transfer Tax. renationalisation and new Government controls.
aTHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN
- Bring back credit rationing, leading to mortgageI queues.86898a We will encourage companies to makeI;; dealing in their own shares easier,. encourage wider share ownership,
These changes would drive savings overseas andthrough, for example, the establishment of make wealth again the prerogative of the few.‘Share Shops’.
By contrast, we want to do more to encourage them We will abolish Stamp Duty on share wider distribution of wealth throughout society. transactions.
Sustaining not just a home-owning but a capitalC) owning democracy is crucial to our vision for the
“l99Os. We intend to spread the ownership of shares, I homes, pensions and savings. We will do sothrough CAI future privatisations, help for wouldbe home4 SETTING THE ECONOMY FREEI owners in council tenancies and furtheroo,.
encouragement for the spread of personal pensions. Starting with the abolition of exchange controls inI
We intend to lighten the burden of capital taxes and l979, the Government has created new incentives reform the taxation of savings. for every part of our economy.
We believe Inheritance Tax is particularly I Manufacturing industry suffered particularly badlyI inequitable. It falls only on those who do not disposefrom the harm inflicted on the British economy byI of their assets seven years or more before theirdeath. Labour Governments in the l96Os and l97Os. To aI
It is inevitably the case that these tend tobe people _-‘far gr cater omen than sewwice industries, it was the who are not rich enough to engage in high-powered -- victim of militant trades unionism, restrictive tax planning, or who, for lack of knowledge or practices, nationalisation, state intervention, taxI advice, fail to take the necessary precautionarydistortion, planning controls and over-regulation.
tien In the Budget, we announced that we wouldWe believe strongly that a vigorous manufacturing
O € whet amy the new votingee wall ‘aX sector is essential to a healthy British economy. Over together. During the new Parliament, we will aim the past l3 years, we have steadily dismantled
C) to lessen the burden on families to whom homebarriers to its growth.
~’ _ gwnership has brought the threat of this erratic tax..
The competitiveness and performance of British manufacturing have been transformed. Its impressiveI m As detailed later in this Manifesto, weBatch onde recognised by the Confederation ofI will aim to bring home ownership, shareritish industry, in its report aptly titted Competing ownership and personal pensions withinwith the World’s Best’. Manufacturing productivity the reach of more families. has risen by more than half since l979 - faster than in.;. any other major industrial country. Over the past lO
We will continue to reform the taxationyears, British manufactured exports have grown faster of savings, building on the success ofthan those of France, Germany, the United States or
PEPs and TESSAs. even Japan.
a We will raise the tax threshold forThe British motor industy has achieved an astonishingI
Inheritance Tax so that the homes and -revival. By l996, Britain should again be exportingI
Savings of an increasing number of ourmore cars than we import - for the first time since l974.
citizens can pass unencumbered fromWe have given the industry yet more encouragement in one generation to another. the Budget, by halving the special tax paid on new cars.," Whenever possible, we will ensure thatThe British Standard for Quality management hasI future privatisations offer opportunitieseffectively become the international standard. But thatI to employees to secure a stake in theis only the beginning. We have set up a team of seniorI ownership of their business. business people to pursue the idea of a new British
Quality Award. I
IWEALTH AND OWNERSHIP
The City is Europe's greatest financial centre. It I We have returned to private enterprise two-thirds of contributes £ll, OOO million net to our balance of I the companies once owned by the state: 46 payments. Financial services employ l2 per cent of businesses employing about 9OO, OOO people. This our workforce. London’s capital markets and programme has been the model for governments financial services have grown vigorously because they _ across the whole world.
are innovative and highly competitive. We will continue our efforts to break down the barriers that The work of liberalising markets which were once prevent them from competing freely throughout -_ monopolised goes on. In l984 we privatised British
Europe and in the wider world. Telecom but only jMercury was given a licence to
The European Bank for Reconstruction and tty services over fixed links. In l99l we decided to
Development is now based in London. It puts us inend this duopoly. The UK now has one of the most the forefront of encouraging investment in the °P¢n and dynamic telecommunications markets in QO) developing markets of Central and Eastern Europe. the world.
Service industries make a vital contribution to our But much greater economic efficiency is not the only economy and to our balance of payments. Tourism, gain. Employees have been able to take a direct stake for examp le, today employs l.5 million people, 2O% inthe newly privatised companies. Millions of people more than in l98O. It is an industry which boasts have been given the same chance to own a real share many famous companies - but it is also driven by thein the nation’s assets. Companies which looked
Nn ee les wed epdatine Gq awards to Whitehall are now listening to their business and through the DTI Enterprise Initiativecustomers and shareholders.
and a range of other schemes. ae
Some activities of government must always be provided in the public sector. But in central m We will continue to reduce tax burdensgovernment, Next Steps Agencies and local on business, as we have done this yeargovernment, management is increasingly buyingin for the motor industry, whenever it isservices from the private sector. Our proposals for possible to do so. developing this policy have been set out in the White... Papers on ‘Competing for Quality’ in central and _ a We, will abolish unnecessary licenceslocal government. Oo and reduce the need for specific approvals for product design.
a We will back British companies..«es encountering any discrimination, tradea We will co Rridich Coll will be barriers or state subsidies that should noprogramme.:° eee; returned to the private sector. So will longer exist within the Single Market. local authority bus companies. We will a We will back the regulators of theencourage local authorities to sell their financial services industry in theirairports. We will end British Rail’s efforts to achieve high standards whilemonopoly. We will sell certain rail keeping the rule books down toservices and franchise others. These manageable size. proposals are set out later in this
Manifesto.
Ceaa The Ports Act l99l has paved the way for
Da PRIVATISATIONthe privatisation of the Trust Ports by we.. competitive tender. Tees and and choice. They lead to the creation of world-classClyde have already been privatised.
companies.,9THE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAINI
III a We are privatising Northern Ireland@ The compliance costs of new UK and EC
Electricity and _ will privatise theregulations must be assessed properly. I
Northern Ireland water and sewageExisting regulations which areI services. We will look for ways of bringingoutmoded and burdensome must be private sector skills into the managementsimplified or removed. We will give of Northern Ireland Railways. priority to the work of the DTI a We will bring private sector enterpriseDeregulation Unit in these areas.
into the public services by encouragingm We will examine ways in which the contracting out and competitiveuniform scope of regulation could be
Otendering throughout government. eased to safeguard traditional localI
~~ma We will require all governmentproducts or practices. I departments to report annually on theirWe will examine whether certainI plans for market-testing, and progress inregulations affecting individual citizens achieving it, in their own services and inwithin their own homes could be madeI those of their associated agencies. advisory, rather than mandatory. I uw We will maintain our programme ofI compulsory competitive tendering of local authority services. We will ensure. 2 that unfair terms are excluded and will4 ENERGYI discourage investment to protect in-.
house services when better, more costpur energy policies have brought the consumer both effective services are available through3 stich Gas, and better service. we have privatise the private sector. British Gas and the electricity industry in a way that;. has opened these markets to competition. These m We will ensure that competitivepolicies are now being seized upon in Europe as
‘tendering is extended to white collaressential extensions of the Single Market.
local authority services, such as thoseD. db.
~offered by lawyers, accountants, omestic Customers are now protected Dy a price
\: formuia, and high standards of service are enforced
C)architects and surveyors. b::. y the independent regulators. For instance,
We will tackle all anti-competitive andelectricity disconnections for debt have fallen by 43I restrictive practices with vigour. We willper cent since the launch of privatisation. I introduce new legislation givingWe have ensured that the safety of employees comesI stronger powers to deal with cartels. first, and have given thousands the opportunity ofI i, acquiring a stake in their industry. I ray
7 DEREGULATIONThe future of the coal industry depends crucially onI
We are concerned that at every level of governmentthe competitiveness of coal as a fuel for electricity wegeneration. British Coal has made enormous progress
- in Europe, in Whitehall and in local authorities- 9 >”.: esI.: in increasing productivity since the end of the l985 some regulations may have been adopted in answer: oe.. I to legitimate concerns, but without proper regard tostrike - but there 3s still further to go. We will suppo rt ie. Peeraethe efforts of British Coal and its workforce to improve their overall impact on businesses and individuals. Athe industry’s performance. The lone term future of proper balance needs to be struck between essentialthe indu try lies in the private se ctor.
protection for the public, and over-zealous andstryPmo, intrusive controls aimed at the elimination of all © We have invested in clean coal technology toI conceivable risk. It is wrong that new regulations, safeguard the environment. Renewable energyI designed to deal with isolated problems, should _ projects have received unprecedented support.
interfere with the private arrangements of citizensor North Sea oil and gas are enjoying a recordI with reasonable commercial practices that have expansion thanks to our policies of deregulation andI earned broad public acceptance. low taxation.
lOWEALTH AND OWNERSHIP. a... aproportion of national income as the Japanese or
@ Safety will remain our highest priorityAmericans. And since l978, British industry’s spending throughout the energy sector. on R&D has increased by 37 per cent in real terms.
& We will continue to encourage competition in energy markets. We will progressively.::
reduce British Gas’ monopoly of the retail. i ¢ will Continue to support our science base to maintain the excellence of our gas market, to give small users the same:
rights as big firmsscience and to ensure that we produce
8i 8°the skilled technical people we need.
a We will privatise British Coal in a way‘ that enables employees to enjoy a stakew We will encourage the transh er of peop le in the industryand technology from - universities toC), usinesses and upgrade the LINK.
m We will increase our support for Britishscheme, which funds joint research.
Coal Enterprise. which P wffectada We will encourage the establishment of economic regeneration in areas affectedcentres of technological excellence by the nae of 76. OOO and haslinking industrial research organifinding ne i ‘obs. CE ASIN PEOPKE Insations with universities and__poly-
°technics.. we wil review the future of the nucicarm We will continue to develop new wn fee a in: ir nek comm “Theinnovation schemes for small and sare an veriet array nuc ate te ne I €medium-sized businesses, including the wacte will be vaintened.. $ for nuclearhighly-regarded SPUR programme to wastemaintainedprovide help with the development of new m We will maintain a guaranteed marketproducts and processes.
for renewable energy projects and fund research in this area.- w We will consult on new buildingia REGIONAL POLICIES regulations to improve energy use..;/
Together with British Gas and some ofIn recent years, the United Kingdom has attracted O the Regional Electricity Companies, wefive times as much Japanese investment as Germany will establish an independent Energybe France, winich powerfully demonstrates that we efficiency. Our grants scheme for lowEurope for investors. Our positive policy towards income households will receive recordinward investment will be maintained, in contrast to funding next year. that of the TUC and the Labour Party.
The Government will continue to invest in a strong
Cainfrastructure, and boost technology expertise in the fr SCIENCE AND INNOVATIONregions.:
British science has an unrivalled reputation for.. oe ground-breaking research. We believe in investing inWe will ensure that regional policy is well scientific research because it enriches the quality oftargeted our lives and provides the feedstock of industrial I We will continue to support all parts of the innovation. The science budget has grown by 24 perUnited Kingdom in their campaigns to cent in real terms since l97879. Increasingly, attract inward investment.
funding will reflect the quality of the research output“no: ee:
so that the best centres can truly be world leaders. We eating Bie iiditional choot ene
The Government spends nearly £3, OOO million a year onallocating funds.
civil research and development - at least as high a llI we.- I
THE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAINI "J SMALL BUSINESSES; a The independent Law Commission hasI
Small businesses are the seedcorn of the economy. recommended that a commercial tenant
Their numbers have grown by more than a third sinceshould in general be freed from any futureI l979, while the number of self-employed people hasliability under a lease when he assigns grown to over l2 per cent of the workforce. We willaway his interest under it. We willI continue to recognise the special needs of small andconsider how this principle could be putI medium-sized companies, and to ensure thatinto effect for new commercial leases. I
Government delivers useful services to them.
Our tax regime for small businesses is one of the most «LC &I
©favourable in Europe. We have raised the VATL ft CONSUMER AFFAIRSI éthreshold every year since l979 and reduced the small;; companies rate of Corporation Tax from 42 per cent toConsumers want choice, quality and value for money.
25 per cent. Competition only works effectively if consumers haveI athe information they need to make sensible decisions.
Training and Enterp rise Councils (and Local EnterpriseOur food safety policy promotes consumer choice andI
Companies in Scotland) have developed a wide rangeconsumer safety. We introduced the l99O Food SafeI of services for business and enterprise which assist overAct to ensure e highest standards of food hygiene Y l5O, OOO small companies each year. We haveyeene. I developed the popular Enterprise Initiative, under. I which 4O, OOO companies have been helped to buy in outside expertise offering key management skills. Wea We will introduce legislation designed toI now propose to develop this initiative further. give consumers confidence that what.. they purchase is properly described - and
We also propose to help businesses by easing thethat ‘adequate compensation is offered transfer of commercial tenancies. where these requirements are not met.
m We will enable the courts to override. unfair terms in contracts and improve m We announced in the Budget newour powers to deal with rogue traders.
C)measures to help small businesses, I
~including full relief against Inheritancew We will ensure that guarantees mean what
Tax on most business assets, reductionsthey say, and that manufacturers or in business rates and proposals to speedimporters share responsibility with the up the payment of outstanding bills. people who sell their goods. I... a We will tighten up the rules on holiday m During the new Parliament, we willbrochures and contracts, and introduce aI develop a new Enterprise Service to give‘cooling-off? period into timeshare small and medium-sized companies helpcontracts.
in diagnosing their most importantencasog
Strategic needs. A new Consultancya We pie introduce legislation to simply
Brokerage Service will supply informationtrade mar oe Jon and extend the to small companies. We will also developrights they confer.
a Technology Audit which will providem We will enforce science-based controls on, small firms with a plan for change. And wethe use of chemicals in food production, will continue to support Total Qualityand will maintain our policy of open accessI
Management consultancies. to information on pesticide safety. I.‘m We will improve standards of foodI w TECs and LECs will be closely involved )labelling in close consultation with wn deve loping and implementing thisconsumer representatives.
new initiative.
l2ITHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN
CHOICE AND THE CHARTER
The Citizen’s Charter is the most far-reaching programme ever devised to improve quality in public services. It addresses the needs of those who use public services, extends people’s rights, requires services to set clear standards - and to tell the public how far those standards are met.
The Citizen’s Charter:. Da KNOWLEDGE, STANDARDS, CHOICE
~ widens popular choice; The next Conservative Government will carry the
- helps people to exercise that choice in a properly Charter still further. There will be more information informed way; about standards and performance; clear standards; set within public services which are still shrouded in ©
- expects all public services to put the customermystery; more choice built into public services and first;‘proper complaints procedures introduced. Many of eatthese are outlined later in the Manifesto under
7 promotes the challenge of competition within theEducation, Health, Local Government and
P, Transport. Here are a few examples from the
- requires clear performance standards to be set -_ programme for the next two years:
and for services to be measured against them;
- insists on a proper response to complaints and ona The Audit Commission vill be able to tion to set right the problems behind them. publish league tables of periormance aqnon ro ser igneme P, including each local council and health
The Charter will be at the centre of government’sauthority so that people can compare the decision-making throughout the l99Os. No one; quality of service. I doubts the professionalism of the ve, majority ofu We will ensure that inspection reports pu re eth d ut re or vd © sys at then fromare published and widely available. All working methods and attitudes prevent them Ifocouncils will have to respond in public to giving their best. The Charter’s commitment tocriticism from auditors modern, open services will help them to win theMee_-, respect that good service deserves. uw We will introduce a new ‘Charterline;. that people with questions or problemsC)
In less than a year since the White Paper, l8 detailedwith a public service will be able to ring.
Fea a dale ond dee nea infoneos end igkeg We will require British Rail to tighten its to the public. Each will be revised regularly to checktargets for reliability andP unctuality on::, port monthly to passengers on progress, and raise standards higher. But, already, on how it is doing. London Underground results are clear. will publish its own Charter.
~ In hospitals, from April, every out-patient willm We will expect Post Offices and Job have a fixed appointment time and our guaranteeCentres to set out standards of service of maximum waiting times for operations will beand levels of achievement.
steadily improved. w A new Charter Mark award will give
~ Oncouncil estates every tenant will have the rightrecognition to those parts of the public to call in a private contractor if the council fails toservice that best meet Charter standards.
do a minor repair. a British Rail and London Underground
- In schools, all parents will have the right to afor introducing compensation systems report on their child’s performance and details on._ that of the school. a We will review the powers of the Local; Government Ombudsman to ensure that
Rights such as these should not have been denied tofindings of maladministration are properly the public. The Citizen’s Charter, steadily but surely, dealt with by all local authorities.
is changing all that.
l3I
THE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAINI w We will consult on a new Laymw We will publish later this year newI
Adjudicators scheme to help the publicproposals for the inspection of social resolve difficulties and disputes. work in England, setting upI arrangements for systematic indepen-.. aedent inspection of all care services and
We will extend competition and accountability inevery local authority social services public services. Those who provide public servicesdepartment.
will have to prove they can give the right quality at;. I.. the right cost.« Inspections of local authority homes willI
C)be carried out by teams that contain lay
- a We will extend compulsory competitiveingpectors. dare independent of theI eeulsoinfluence of the management of the tendering to local authority housing, homes.
management, and examine how to apply itI to white-collar services.-. I a We will act to ensure that private firmsAll of the privatised utilities have a specialistI bidding to improve local authority publicregulator who 38 __Tesponsiole d or tine the services are not obstructed bycompetition, reviewing prices and protecting theI unscrupulous practices in councils or bypublic interest. We have introduced legislation toI unfair contracts. ened powers of these regulators to the level ofI uw We will pursue more competitiveI tendering for central government
We willthe wid'ri We are ensuring that the regulators have a We will encourage the wider use oe powers they need to promote performance pay inside the Civil Servicecompetition and safeguard the interests of and in other parts of the public service. the customer by controlling price neA link between a person’s effort and hisincreases. We will increase competition in
C)or her pay is a powerful means ofthe gas and water markets.
Iimproving performance.. a We are giving the regulators powers to m Civil servants dealing with the public willset standards of service, covering such normally identify themselves by name. matters as fixed appointment times for a We will toughen inspection of key publicservice calls.
services where choice and competitionI must inevitably be limited. We willae)I introduce, for the first time, regularDa THE POST OFFICEI independent inspection of all schools. The Post Office is among the best in Europe forI a We will ac to ensure that the inspectoratesspeed and reliability of its letter services. Traffic hasI of police,. wn ptoba he nnewgrown by 5O per cent in a decade in which it has inspectorates that are established, will beoperated without subsidy. Last year the first-class; cd, wiletter service achieved record improvements in truly independent of the service whichreliability. The local post office is a vital and valued they inspect. feature of the rural community.
* ete sae negalar Pa rts rom theseIn l98l we introduced private competition for ublished. More lay ins mn ctors, drawndeliveries costing over £l. This led to the rapid
P°y isp4growth of the private courier industry, with from other professions and from thebstantial benefits to busiWe beli general public, will bring fresh insightssubstan merits to business users. eve into service improvementthat further benefits to consumers would flow from
P°additional competition.:{CHOICE AND THE CHARTER contracting-out executive functions. We want to w We are committed to maintaining a nation-ensure that the drive to save money, to reduce wide letter service with delivery to everybureaucracy and raise quality is powerfully led from address in the United Kingdom, within athe centre of government.
uniform structure of prices, and with a nation-wide network of post offices.
mw We will legislate to set up a newa We will Bive a Cabinet Minister independent regulator to advise onresponsibility for the Citizen’s Charter issues affecting Post Office customers, programme - and reforming the Civil and on the progressive introduction ofService, taking charge of the Citizen’s competition. Charter Unit, Efficiency Unit, the XO. programme for creating Agencies and the. We will set performance targets for thePublic Competition and Purchasing Unit... y *This will make it easier to raise quality and published in all offices, together with.° results achievedefficiency in government and see that. contracting-out and market-testing are m We will ensure there is effective redressenergetically pursued.
for customers where services fail. We intendd.. ma We intend to create a new department, a We will lower the limit on the Post Officeunder a Cabinet Minister, with fest clas y much closer to the level of theresponsibility for broadcasting, arts, sport, rst Class stamp. tourism, the national heritage and the film m We will provide improved scope forindustry. This department will aim to contractors to carry mail to final deliveryencourage private sector enterprise in all offices. these fields. The National Lottery and the a We will consider requests to licenseMillennium Fund (detailed later in this limited specialist services to competeManifesto) will also bring new within the Post Office monopoly. responsibilities to government in these areas.
ooa We will transfer the core responsibilitiesCO) yof the Department of Energy to the
“4 WHITEHALL & WESTMINSTERDepartment of Trade and Industry and
Whitehall must move with the times. It is over aresponsibilities for energy efficiency to decade since the last major restructuring of thethe Department of the Environment, departments of government. Since then: ending the need for a@ separate department.
- Two-thirds of the state industrial sector has been.
privatised, transferring about 9OO, OOO jobs to thea Small businesses are the seedcorn of our private sector. future prosperity. We believe the
Department of Trade and Industry
- Government has reduced the burden ofshould take over responsibility for them.
regulation and the need for central bureaucracy. We also want to strengthen the links
- Civil Service manpower has been reduced bybetween the DTI and the highly almost a quarter. successful Training and Enterprise
- Many of the functions of government have beenCouncils.
devolved from Whitehall. a Responsibility for overseeing all
- The Citizen’s Charter programme is bringing newfinancial services will be brought quality to public services. together in the Treasury, in line with the practice adopted in most other advanced
We will continue to reorganise central government incountries.
tune with its modern role, while devolving and
Il5
TOIITHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN
III:. We intend to carry forward this move towards greater a New programmes for regenerating ouropenness. I inner cities are outlined in this
Manifesto. Responsibilities will be __ brought together in the Department ofuw We will review the 8O or so statutory restrictions which exist on the disclosure a We are determined to ensure that womenof information - retaining only thoseI in the work-force realise their fullneeded to protect privacy and essential potential. We will transfer from theconfidentiality. I
Home Office to the Department of..
7Employment the lead responsibility foru We will seek to provide greater access to
C)coordinating government policy onpersonal records held by government.
issues of particular concern to women. a We will be less secretive about the workings of government. For example,
Lewhen the Committees of the Cabinet are
4 OPEN GOVERNMENTreconstituted after the election we will, I for the first time, set out their names and
Government has traditionally been far too reluctantmembership. We will update and - for the to provide information. This secrecy extends fromfirst time - publish the guidance for the processes of Cabinet Government to schoolsMinisters on procedure. I which refuse to release exam results. Under theI
Citizen’s Charter, a great deal more information is now being made available on the services provided by government,> uot
We have also: f THE WORKINGS OF PARLIAMENT
- replaced the catch-all provisions of the l9ll -_It is not just Whitehall that must change. Parliament,
Official Secrets Act with narrower offences too, has. to keep its working methods under review
Cdepending on specific tests of the harm likelyto to make sure it attracts the best people to the service
)be caused by disclosure, while giving specialof their country and uses their talents to best effect.
protection to vital information relating to our national security; I
- introduced rights to check certain personal recordsa We will propose appropriate ParliaI held on computer, and supported new rights ofmentary Eslorms “to ensure that theI. ousommons access to a range of government records; business more efficiently and effectively, I
~ committed ourselves to a public right of access totaking into account the benefits of information about the environment, includingmodern technology, the increasing water supply, air quality, dumping at sea andconstituency demands upon Members radioactive substances; of Parliament and the need to attractI
~ made available more reports on matters of publicmore women to stand for election.
concern such as food safety and industrial risks.-
III l6I
ITHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN.
OPPORTUNITY FOR ALL
Conservatives believe that high standards in education and training are the key to personal opportunity and national success. We believe in partnership with parents, choice in schools and a good grounding in the basic skills all children need to make a success of their lives. We are committed to widening opportunities without compromising academic standards. We will continue to expand higher education and training. We will reinforce the rights of the individual in the world of work, and break down artificial barriers to advancement. By extending opportunity and arming people with the power to choose, we will give valuable freedoms and a powerful spur to achievement.
~ J SCHOOLS, PUPILS & PARENTS~ Creating a number of highly popular City.
yy.; li; Technology Colleges. oO) e are now seeing real improvements in our.. ae education system. One in four young people goeson ~ Laune hing the highly successful initiative under to higher education; at the beginning of the l98Os, itwhiche are Th “he bid directly for the was only one in eight. Sixty per cent of l6 year-oldsresources to become Technology Schools.
stay on in full-time education, up from only 4O per - We intend to take all these initiatives further and cent in l979. And we have embarked on the most offer parents more choice in the new Parliament.. important and wide-ranging reforms since the l94Os. Popular schools will be allowed to expand, and more
For the first time in our history, we will soon have a _Schools will be able to apply for technology funding.
National Curriculum which will require all the main We will make it easier for small schools to enjoy the school subjects to be covered thoroughly. The testing benefits of GM status by grouping together.
of 7 year-olds is well under way and tests for older children are now being developed. Starting thisa We will complete the introduction of the
September, GCSE courses will be steadily integratedNational Curriculum offering lO with the National Curriculum. subjects at a nationally-defined standard
Under the Parent’s Charter, all schools will have to__English, Mathematics, Science, provide at least one written report on the progress ofHistory, Geography, Technology, Art, each child each year. Information on the performanceMusic, PE and, in secondary schools, aeo of all local schools will be given to parents, enablingforeign language.
them to exercise choice more effectively.@ Regular and straightforward tests will be in
We believe all parents have the right to choice inplace for all 7, ll and l4y carolds by l994.
education - not only those who can afford schoola GCSE at age l6 will be integrated into fees. Young people differ in their interests andthe National Curriculum, with anew A+ aptitudes, and we need a range of schools to offergrade to test the most able. The majority them the best opportunities. We have always foughtof marks will come from a written exam.
to maintain diversity in education, protecting them We will continue to encourage the right of local people to preserve their grammarcreation of nursery places. For the first schools, and defending independent schools againsttime, over 5O per cent of three and fourmindless Labour attacks. And we have always valuedyear olds have places either in nursery or the important contribution made by the churches toprimary schools.
our children’s education. a Full information will be published
We have further increased diversity by: annually about the performance of all.. local schools in each area.
- Giving schools control over their own budgets;..
and encouraging new types of school. w Independent inspection of schools will;. provide parents with straightforward
- Allowing schools to become independent of localreports on their child’s school, together councils, by applying for Grant-Maintained statuswith an action plan from governors to if the parents involved so wish. By mid-l992, remedy any weaknesses.
over 2OO GM schools will be up and running.
a. THE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN a. I m Popular schools which are over. m We will undertake reform of the teacher subscribed will be given the resources totraining system to make it more effective expand. in developing classroom skills.
a GM schools will be able to change theirm We will develop measures to encourage character if that is what parents clearlywomen with family responsibilities to want and the change fits in with theenter or return to teaching.
wider needs of the local area.
a The Technology Schools Initiative will be expanded across the country.
C )w Existing schools which opt for GM4 AFTER l6 status will be able to emulate City;
Technology Colleges and attract privateWe believe that young people should be free to technology sponsorship. choose between college, work-based training and
We will maintain the Assisted PIsixth form studies. We are giving further education ma wehich, the Assisted Placescolleges and sixth form colleges in England and scheme, wi ich Bives access toWales autonomy, free from council control. We alsoI independent e Nhecwis to ford familiesvalue our school sixth forms, and will ensure they who could not otherwise afford it. retain their place in the new system. And we willI
- m We will ensure that the partnershipallow them to attract older students as well. FE between the state and the churches incolleges will continue to receive support for adult education is maintained and strengthened. education, while local authorities will retain the a We will enable small schools to apply forresources to respond to local demand for leisureI
GM status in groups. COUTSES.
m We will pay particular attention toWe will defend the well-respected Alevel raising educational standards in areas ofexaminations, which Labour would destroy. We will deprivation in our cities. continue to encourage participation in AS
_examinations. We will also continue to develop new
C)high-quality National Vocational Qualifications, and
°wRintroduce a new postl6 diploma which recognises
Da TEACHINGachievement in both vocational and academic
We are determined to reinforce the professionalismCOUFSES. I of teachers and the esteem in which they are held...
We have created an independent Teachers’ Paybal We will develop an Advanced Diploma
Review Body. We accepted in full its firstwhich can be earned by students recommendations; nearly half of all teachers are nowpursuing either academic or vocational earning over £2O, OOO a year. We will press ahead withcourses, and a new General National regular appraisal of teachers to encourage highVocational Qualification.
standards and develop professional skills. a We intend to allow school sixth forms to
As a first step in the reform of teacher training, open their doors if they wish to older postgraduate students will spend much more time instudents, and to accept training credits school classrooms, learning their skills under theor fees from them.
practised eye of senior teachers. m@ From April next year, further education
It is vital that the education system should attractand sixth form colleges will be back women who have taken a career break to raiseindependent of local government control.
a family. Through grants to local authorities, we arem Mature students will enjoy a wider financing schemes to introduce more flexiblechoice of courses.
working practices - such as job-sharing.
IOPPORTUNITY FOR ALL wu &:
_p HIGHER EDUCATION~ ‘Compacts’ have resulted in many young people
B aintains the be. tem Iworking to goals for attainment and attendance in ritain maintains the best university system inschool. In return, they are guaranteed a job with
Europe. We have also developed a thriving networktraining - or training leading to a iob of polytechnics, whose student numbers have§6Bf a jon.
increased nearly sixfold since the end of the l96Os.~ This year, two million students will participate in
By the year 2OOO, one in three young people will followthe ‘Technical and Vocational Education full-time higher education magia Meanwhile theInitiative.
number of mature entrants to higher education has...
risen by 65 per cent since l979. And our universities are ~ favestors m People is the new national standard attracting increasing numbers of foreign students. or companies making a commitment to training.
monTECs play an important role in helping
Despite this huge expansion, our students enjoy onecompanies attain it. C) of the most generous support systems in the world.)
The introduction of student loans has given students © -- Employer-led TECs and LECs are delivering
3O per cent more money for their living costs than theGovernment-funded training programmes which former system of grants alone. The new system willreflect industry’s understanding of local needs.
steadily reduce the proportion of students’ living;- Industry is working closely with the National costs that their parents are expected to meet. Council for Vocational Qualifications.
a We will continue to expand the number~ The CBI’s training targets for Britain’s workforce of students in higher education. We aredemonstrate a new partnership between business abolishing the artificial ‘binary line’and education.
between universities and polytechnics.;;
75 per cent of l6 year-olds stay on in full-time ws We are putting in place new mechanismseducation or Youth Training schemes, up from 46 per to ensure that academic standards arecent in l979. Since l983, over 3 million young maintained in higher education. people have taken up Youth Training places. And 82.& We will continue to provide generousper cent go into jobs or further education when they support for students and to expand ourcomplete l.
student loans commitment. Now we are offering young people aged l6 and l7) vouchers they can use to buy approved courses of education or training, and which will put the power of choice in their hands.
In l988, we launched Employment Training, the
L THE TRAINING REVOLUTIONlargest programme of its kind in Europe, which has
A training revolution is under way in Britain. The since helped l.2 million people. While local
Government’s job is to create a framework within programmes are the responsibility of the TECs, the which men and women of all ages can develop skills, Government guarantees the offer of help to gain qualifications and shape their own futures. particular groups of unemployed.
We have already brought the world of work and the -_Last year, we launched the new Employment Action world of school into closer harmony. Government and -_- programme, which will help more than 6l, OOO industry are working together. Employers already spend -_ people ina full year. This is a new addition to arange over £2O, OOO million a year on training. Government of measures which include Jobclubs, the Job spending on training has increased 2¥, times in realInterview Guarantee Scheme and other tested terms since l979, to £2,8OO million. The Government's -_- methods of helping unemployed people back to effort is being channelled through the 82 new Training > work..
and Enterprise Councils (and the Local Enterpriseoa,.
Companies in Scotland) - the most significant peace. We are also supporting individual training effort.
time partnership between government and industry this Since l988, when we launched Career Development century. Loans (interest-free for up to l5 months), over l9:; I
THE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN
25, OOO people have benefited. Last year’s BudgetSympathy strikes would be legalised by Labour, and gave tax relief on training fees - a boost to the employers would be prevented from dismissing
25O, OOO people a cat who finance their own __ strikers who broke their contracts.
training. Now, with the TECs, we intend to introduceTh+..: se. e workers’ rights we believe in are those which new financial help for career and training guidance. enhance individuals’ status and opportunities. We a By the end of the new Parliament, theSee ee eee chin atc thee k No
Ocslif. stem a National Voca tionalone should be allowed to deduct trade union fees
Qualifications 5 ould cover virtuallyautomatically from an employee’s pay without
CBI occupation in the visage 2O Thewritten authorisation. Individuals must be given
~§ training targets envisage SY pergreater rights to belong to the union of their choice.
< }cent of young people reaching NVQ: level 2 by the end of the Parliament. We also believe strongly that employers, employees
We intend to make trainiditand customers should not have their lives and sw eemake training creeitsbusinesses disrupted by wildcat strikes. In the new available to all l6 year-olds and l7 year. Parliament, we will legislate to enforce and enhance olds within the lifetime of the newthese ri ghtsI
Parliament. The TECs will continue to‘ be responsible for the YT programme for this age group. m We will require employers to giveI a We will continue to finance trainingeveryone wh o works for them for more programmes for the long-term unthan eight f thei a week a dcr “tions employed and those who face particularof eminlon of their terms and conditions difficulties. ok employment.:
w We will launch with the TECs a newbe We will make hin duce deduction of initiative, giving people a voucher withsuthe: members ib ful. without written which they can buy a ‘skill check’, authorisation unlawtul.
providing assessment and guidance on howa We will take measures to give individuals
-to make the most of their working lives. greater freedom in choosing a union.
©)am We will legislate to require that all preuistrike ballots are postal and subject to a WORKERS AND UNIONSindependent scrutiny, and that at least
Over the past l3 years, we have legislated to liftefter a days’ notice of a strike is given regulatory burdens from the shoulders of those who°; create jobs in Britain. To industry’s relief, wem People who use public services will have shunned the job-destroying European Socialthe right to restrain the disruption of
Charter. And we reject Labour’s job-destroyingthose services by unlawful industrial notion of a national minimum wage. action.
We have also legislated five times to transformI industrial relations, returning power from militantsI to ordinary union members. As a result, the number © of days lost each year through strikes has fallen fromfr A SHARE IN THE FUTUREI an average l2.9 million in the l97Os to less than aWe also believe that] he: people at work should be helped milion last year - the lowest figure since recordsto build security for themselves and their families.
gan a century ago. Employees should be given every opportunity to
Labour would disrupt industrial peace by weakening acquire a stake in the business for which they work.
the power of management and the courts. They We have ruled that executive share option schemes propose to take away the courts’ most importantmay grant options at a discount only if the employer sanction - the power to take over a union’s assets. also runs an all-employee scheme. I
2O: OPPORTUNITY FOR ALL oo_- rvrr- sss
Saving for a pension reduces reliance on the state. by government is needed to stimulate the provision
We welcome the provision of occupational schemes __ of childcare.
covering over ll million workers. There are already.
important safeguards, which we have improved, forAll employers who meet childcare costs can set these the rights of members in such schemes. But we off against their liability for corporation tax. In believe that a full review of the arrangements is now 24dition, we have relieved employees from paying needed. We also believe that new freedoms for income tax on the benefit of workplace nurseries.
scheme members will strengthen accountability andAfter-school childcare is ari area of particular benefit investors. importance to many working mothers. We will introduce a new initiative to encourage the provision a We will establish a review of theof after-school facilities by schools, employers and framework of law and regulation withinvoluntary groups across the country. O which occupational schemes operate.
w We will give every member of an;.
occupational scheme the right to an annualws The Government will amend the law statement of the value of their savings. relating to the employment rights of
Iw In addition we will examine ways ofpregnant women to give effect to the EC vine thh see with IDirective on Pregnant Workers. This giving those who retire with tump sumaddition to our already extensive legal payments more choice as to how theirprovision will give a right to at least l4 savings are invested. weeks’ maternity leave and protection against dismissal on grounds of pregnancy.
” f WOMEN AND OPPORTUNITYw We will take forward our public
A higher proportion of women go out to work inwal publish plans for I We. Depa ‘quarter
Britain than in any other EC country exceptand a half of public appointments to be
Denmark. Many women choose to work part-time, held by women by l996.
and our policies have encouraged the development:.
of part-time work within a framework whicha We will ensure that all parts of C) safeguards employees from exploitation. government adopt a strategic approach
Throughout Europe, the UK is recognised to have° the empio yment and d evelop ther of the most comprehensive legislation to combat sexparticipate in the Opportunity 2OOO discrimination. We are also committed to breakinginitiative.
down artificial barriers to women’s advancement..
based on prejudice or lack of imagination. As ana We vill continue to oppose EC employer, government must continue to set anmeasures which would discourage partexample. time employment, valued by so many
‘omen.
The tax relief we have introduced on training fees is; constructed to ensure that non-tax payers - whoa We will encourage all TECs to adopt - include many married women - will be able toplans to help women trainees have equal benefit, too. Many Training and Enterprise Councilsaccess to training opportunities.
already have specific plans to help women trainees. m We will introduce a new grant, paid
We will involve them further in helping employers tothrough TECs, to help employers, help with childcare. voluntary groups or schools to set up
We believe mothers should be treated equally byafter-school -_ care and holiday government, whether they work outside the home orarrangements. We will ensure that not. We are fully committed to maintaining the realschools are free to participate.
value of child benefit. And we will act where a push oeITHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN
FREEDOM UNDER THE LAW
The Conservative Party has always stood for the protection of the citizen and the defence of the ruleI of law. Society is entitled to a sense of security; individuals to peace of mind; the guardians of that peace to our whole-hearted support. Our policies on law and order, and the rights of individuals, are designed to protect the people of this country and their way of life.
Britain experiences less violent crime than man’already preparing similar plans. Pilot schemes xpe: yy preparingPp comparable countries. But crime has continued tosuggest they can add greatly to the citizen’s sense ofI rise in Britain. And the challenge for the l99Os isto security and build support for the police.
step up the fight against lawlessness and violence, soCommuni. ay:.
~ne: ty Policing will involve local residents,
C)that our citizens can live free from fear. listen to their views and engage their help in the fight
We must continue to ensure that the sentence fits theagainst crime. It will mean:
crime - with long sentences for dangerous criminals. wo...7 smaller police units with officers serving the same and fines and a tougher regime for punishmentarea for longer. That way, people can really get to outside prison available as an alternative for lessknow their local police officers: I serious crime. And we must maintain confidence inPo, our legal system.- each police force devolving its management andI
We must tackle crime at its roots. Two-thirds of theoperational control of comet units, and offences dealt with by our courts are committed by8, only seven per cent of those convicted. Most of these- getting police back on the beat, and in close contactI constant offenders started down the path of crimewith the neighbourhoods under their care.
while still of school age. It will be supported by an extension of
We have launched a reform of our prisons, improving § Neighbourhood Watch schemes, which are vital in the prospect that those who serve custodial deterring theft and burglaries.
sentences will not return to crime. Public confidence in the police is enhanced when
But above all, we must remember that it is ourpeople know what they can expect from their local policemen and women who are in the front line ofpolice force, and when outsiders are let into the
C) the battle. To combat crime effectively, the police process of inspecting how they work. At least five
“need the full support of the Government and the police forces are already leading the way with public. charters setting out their targets.. m We are continuing to increase police
4 POLICE AND THE COMMUNITYnumbers. There will be l, OOO extra
We Conservatives can be proud of our record inpolice officers this year.
supporting the police. Since l979 we have increasedws We will continue to give the police the spending on the police by 74 per cent in real terms. support and resources they need to carry
Uniformed manpower has increased by l6, OOO andout their duties effectively and civilian manpower by l2, OOO. We have launched aefficiently.
campaign to recruit lO, OOO Special Constables. We will be seeking the nation-wide
Over the next few years we want to see a majorintroduction of Community Policing.
refortn which will help provide what the public wantswu We will encourage civilianisation as a and needs: a visible, local police presence. means of freeing police officers for
We will be encouraging police forces to develop localoperational duties.
Community Policing, to link the police more closelyma We will encourage the extension of with the communities they protect. The MetropolitanNeighbourhood Watch to more
Police will be reorganised on this basis by the springresidential areas.
of l993. Two-thirds of English and Welsh forces are
22FREEDOM UNDER THE LAW. Ssvun ven nTEINEDUTONTITIT TOL an a; uu i4 PENALTIES AND PR a We will continue to increase the SpecialrEVENTION
Constabulary, which has seen a rise inOur armoury of criminal law and penalties requires recruitment this year of lO per cent. constant review. We have just introduced a new law a We want each police force to produce aspecifically aimed at the socalled ‘joy-rider’. This charter telling local people, for example, places the responsibility for dangerous driving, I how quickly the police will aim todamage, injury or death following from the taking ofI respond to emergency calls. a vehicle squarely on the shoulders of those in it. I a We will introduce lay inspectors withEven where ‘joy-riding’ is not involved, causing management experience into the policedeath through dangerous or drink driving is a very inspectorate. serious offence. We believe that the maximum Xd sentence for such a crime should reflect its gravity.:
2Squatting is nothing less than the seizure of another’s
-f, PROTECTORS AND VICTIMSproperty without consent. Having consulted widely
We look to the police to protect us. They risk their ©” the subject, we have decided to extend the lives to do so. Police officers are entitled to the “Timinal law dealing with squatting, protection of the community they serve. Those whoTllegal camping by gypsies or other travellers can indulge in the shameful practice of ‘ambushing’, or affect the lives of whole communities. We believe seeking to frustrate the work of the emergencythat this problem must be tackled.
services, deserve to face severe penalties. We.
welcome the findings of a study by the Home OfficeWe are concerned about the small but persistent and Crown Prosecution Service which shows thatwale ckeady bail young people, who reoffend assaults on policemen attract consistently heavier measure to eter them fcr ave ted crim new penalties. But we will examine ways of introducings€r them trom repeated crime.
further protection for the police. Young people who find themselves on probation for
We must also pay special attention to the needs of theshoplifting, vandalism or per thuggery should be victims of crime, in the courts and in rebuilding theirshould be ere the ae F of crime may lead. They lives. We have increased funding for Victim Support. tare of cian life rief personal experience of the
The number of people directly affected by violentPO and sexual crime remains relatively small. But fear of crime can have a devastating effect on people's lives, m Joy-riders’ will now face prison and P articularly on this fear, s lives. We aresentences of up to 5 years, unlimited etermiuned to reduce tus tear. fines and unlimited driving bans.
a We will extend the maximum sentence
We will set up a working party to° examine what more can be done toee through dangerous or. protect the police and members of other°.
emergency services from assault. m We will create a new criminal offence of a We will encourage victims to report sexual -‘Ee owe to ae greater Pre abo to offences by giving them statutory© cereal an ine Rouse Oo fae” anonymity. commercial premises, houses and flats.
a Under our Safer Cities programme, mw The l968 Caravan ‘Sites Act will be there are l24 schemes to improve streetreviewed with the aim of reducing the lighting, which has been shown tonuisance of illegal encampments.
reduce the fear of crime significantly. a As part of a community sentence, young m Women-only taxi services are beingoffenders will be taken to see what life is encouraged under the same Safer Citiesreally like inside one of our prisons - a programme.- sobering experience for them.
23I nearer et LT LL LC AL In. THE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN., I a We will introduce a new police power toa We will establish the Prison Service as a make an arrest for breach of police bail. separate agency, whose director will ahave the clear responsibility for day-touw We will give the courts the statutoryday operations. The Home Secretary power to increase sentences for thosewill remain ministerially accountable toI who offend while on bail. Parliament for prison policy. I a We will increase the number of bailw We will increase the use of private sector hostel places, to enable closermanagement skills.
supervision of those on bail.
a We will mount a drive against school
Cytruancy, and set up a Task Force to finda
-the best ways of coordinating the work~ OUR LEGAL SYSTEM of local agencies helping young people atri risk of becoming offenders. As a free society we must have a justice system that is fair, accessible and responsive to the citizen.
We have introduced new powers for the Court ofI
Appeal to increase sentences for crime. And inI response to public concern about a small but
- Pr REFORMING OUR PRISONSsignificant number of miscarriages of justice, we have
%appointed a Royal Commission to review aspects of
Prisons should be places which are austere but the criminal justice system, including the conduct ofI decent, providing a busy and positive regime which _ investigations, the handling of forensic evidence, andI prepares prisoners for their ultimate release. the powers of the Court of Appeal.
We have been reversing the Labour Party’s neglect We have already reduced the opportunity for abuse of the prison service in the l97Os. Since l985, l4new by our introduction of tape-recorded interviews of prisons have been opened. 7 more will open over thesuspects by the police. At the same time, we are next two years. The end of overcrowding is now inconcerned that police investigations should not be
Csight. made more difficult by the misuse of certain rights.
“We have already taken steps to implement the key We have already introduced a wide range of reforms recommendations of the Woolf report on the future following our Civil Justice Review. Extending the; of our prisons. We will bring private sector skills into jurisdiction of the County Courts has helped speed enhance efficiency and increase value for money. up justice. The success of the small claims system in these courts has shown that simplified procedures
We have put out to tender the contract for prison _can enable people to conduct their own cases or rely escort services, an approach which has worked well -_on a lay adviser. We have also introduced a reform in other countries. The first contract for a privately which will give people more choice as to who managed remand centre has been awarded. represents them legally in court. I
We are committed to enabling people with limited...; means to have access to legal services. We are w We will sustain our massive prisondetermined to ensure that these services are reform and building programme. delivered efficiently, in a way which provides the best a A reconstruction programme will endvalue for money.; the degrading need for ‘sloping out’ byThe principles of the Citizen’s Charter are being the end of l994. applied to our legal system. We will shortly be wa We will reorganise prisoners’ education, publishing a Courts Charter., oe training and work opportunities. We are overhauling the way in which family matters are handled in our courts. The new family code will
24I
NeeFREEDOM UNDER THE LAW be applied by magistrates and judges especially of successful appeals. We therefore ‘propose to trained in family law. simplify the law relating to libel in the light of the: Our Sunday Trading laws have come into questionas commendations of the Neill Committee.
a result of a possible conflict with Article 3O of theae:
Treaty of Rome. This matter is now before the@ British jfomestic. controlsoa
European Court of Justice, and we are awaiting aveer che. ylotion fk A Si vole judgement. The Government brought forwardE er fhe Morke cron or me single proposals in l986 to reform the shopping laws, butUropean MATNEE,
Parliament was not able to agree a conclusion. a We will increase the maximum penalties
Parliament will be given the opportunity to considerfor making obscene or malicious phone this issue again. calls. XD na._w We propose to allow judges to settle the a We will introduce & major Criminallevel of damages in libel cases where the
Justice Bill in the lifetime of the newdefendant offers to pay to make amends.
arliament.
a We will extend the types of cases whichcan be handled by the County Courts in4 COMMUNITY RELATIONS a simplified way. Racial harmony demands restraint on all sides, and a a We will consult on a Lay Adjudicatorstolerant understanding of the legitimate views of others.
scheme to make it easier for citizens toEverybody, regardless of ethnic background settle disputes with service providers. religious or personal belief, has the right to go about a We will provide a code of family law thathis or her life free from the threat of intimidation and will continue to underpin the institutionassault. We are determined that everyone lawfully of matriage, give priority to the welfaresettled in this country should enjoy the full range of of the child, and emphasise the primaryopportunities in our society. That requires openness responsibility of parents for the welfareon the part of the majority, and, on the part of the of children and the family. ethnic minorities themselves, a determination to
We will bring forward proposals forparticipate fully in the life of the wider community. S reform of the Sunday Trading laws onceThe Home Office invests £l29 million in grants * the legal position has been made clear bydesigned to encourage those running public services: the European Court of Justice. to ensure that people from ethnic minorities can enjoy the full range of public services - such as health, era)housing and social services. We believe that these
44’ PORNOGRAPHY, PRIVACY, LIBELgrants would be more effective if responsibility was
We have the toughest anti-pohy I. transferred to those Departments which can make le haveoughe-pornography laws in£ th;
Western Europe, and we will keep them that way. best use of the money.
Every year, about 3OO, OOO people - mostly women -m Racial and sexual discrimination have request advice and assistance in dealing with obsceneno place in our society. We have given or malicious phone calls. We intend to do more tothe police stronger powers to deal with deter this harassment, in conjunction with theracial hatred. We will continue to ensure telecommunications industry. that the full force of the law is used to
The Press Complaints Commission is now indeal with racial attacks..
operation, and we will monitor its work carefully to We will transfer the education share of the see if self-regulation succeeds. Home Office's ‘Section i’ rmeche the oy eye.. Department of Education, to focus help on phe P ublic’s dislike of unprincipled press behaviourthose from ethnic minority backgrounds erratically large libel damages. Whil e this iswho need additional English language understandable, it has led to an inordinate numberteaching. ' 25I
IfiTHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN
~ a IMMIGRATION AND REFUGEES- we have set up l6 local drug prevention teams in
Good community relations in this country dependinner cities to tackle particular problem areas; upon a clear structure of immigration controls which ~ WE have created the National Drugs Intelligence are fair, understandable and properly enforced. WeUnit at New Scotland Yard; are determined to maintain our present system of I - we have taken the lead in Europe in pressing for immigration controls unless we have evidence thatthe establishment of a Europe-wide Drugs Unit, other arrangements would be equally satisfactoryas a first step towards a creation of a ‘Europol’; and cost-effective.- we have set up a network of 3l drug liaison
But an increasing number of wouldbe immigrantsofficers, in l9 different countries, tracking the from Eastern Europe and other parts of the worldinternational drugs traffickers who threaten. seek to abuse our openness to genuine refugees. TheBritain with their trade.
©number of people seeking refugee status has risen © We now have the toughest sanctions in Western from 5, OOO a year to 45, OOO over the past four years. Europe against drug traffickers.
We will continue to honour our commitment to the Anumber of public services and voluntary bodies are l95l UN Convention, and give refuge to those who -_engaged in fighting drug misuse at local level. Such reach our shores with a well-founded fear of - effortsneed coordination to ensure that local effort persecution. and dedication is directed to best effect.
a Inthe new Parliament we must thereforea We will not legalise any banned drugs.
reintroduce the Asylum Bill, opposed bym We will bring forward proposals to
Labour and the Liberal Democrats, toensure that the control of drug misuse is create a faster and more effective systemco-ordinated effectively.
of determining who are genuine politicalWe intend refugees, and who are not. We intend tostrengthenour: confiscatory powers still further. And m We will provide a fair and expeditiouswe will ensure that our controls against system for examining claims for refugeedrug-trafficking are not weakened by status. This will include a workableany changes in Europe.
appeal system for applicants under.:
Owhich those with manifestly unfounded. We wit make ds an offence to supply claims will be returned quickly to theircsoF.
own country or to the country they cameCea from.4 THE THREAT OF TERRORISM a Fingerp rinting will be introduced forTragic and dangerous events remind us only too asylum applicants, to prevent multiplefrequently of the need for the special measures, applications and fraudulent benefitprovided by the Prevention of Terrorism Act. While claims. Labour proposes to weaken or dismantle them, we
Cmknow that for the safety of our citizens they must be
Y THE DANGER OF DRUGScontinued, and the police effort against terrorism
4must be reinforced.
Illegal drug abuse poses a major threat to the fabric © We have set up in New Scotland Yard arrangements of our society. It can destroy the health and lives of to coordinate the activities of all our police forces in young people in particular. We will tackle this _the fight against terrorism. I problem with vigour. I
We have already taken action on a wide front: w We will provide the necessary measures:: and resources to combat terrorism.
~ we have set UP. coordinators iny localwhether it comes from the IRA or other education authority to train teachers about theevil groups who seek to undermine our harm drugs can do, and to bring the fight againstdemecrah, drug abuse into the classroom;%
26THE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN. enI
RESPONSIBILITY FOR OTHERSI
Conservatives believe we have responsibility one for another. We will continue to care for those in need and work to establish a society that is generous, as well as prosperous. Our health, care and social security systems are fundamental to government responsibilities; and we believe strongly in fostering voluntary services too.
f THE NHS -- PRESENT AND FUTURE - We have restored the hospital building... amm: ly cut by Labour at the end
The Conservative Party is totally committed to theProgramme So savage:. National Health Service. The Government has setof their last term of office.) out in the Patient’s Charter the principles on whichBut the Conservative Government has not simply the NHS is based. The most fundamental of these is spent more money on the NHS.
that need, and not ability to pay, is and will remain.
the basis on which care is offered to all by the NHS.- We have reformed the organisation of the NHS
Since l979. there have be.. to encourage those working in the service to sk oy re ere have been great improvements inrespond to what patients want and need, and to the health of the nation. get the most out of the increased money which
~ Life expectancy has increased by two years. the taxpayer provides.
~- Deaths amongst babies and very young children __-At local level, health authorities now have the task of have gone down by 4O per cent. buying health care with their local share of the.. a: National Health budget. Hospitals can now be run
~ hospitals car treating well over a million moreby their own local team of doctors, nurses and
People ayP: managers. By April there will be l56 NHS Trusts,
- hospitals are treating over two million more - whose local boards will have extra freedoms to people a year as out-patients. develop local NHS services. Another l56 hospitals
~ kidney transplants have more than doubled. have applied to become trusts from April l993. I
~ hip replacements have increased by over 5O perNien acted to rear eng hours worked by Oo. ie cent. are being set on the number of hours which may be
- coronary artery bypasses have nearly tripled. worked continuously.
Since l979 the Government has vastly increased theGood nursing is the essential complement to good resources available to the NHS. medicine. We have introduced Project 2OOO - a new
- We have increased overall funding forthe NHS by __ @pproach to the professional training of nurses.
55 per cent after allowing for inflation. The cash.., increases in each of the three years up to l992-93The GP nas a crucialole as lay in the develo Pond.
have been the biggest ever. h Iding initiative, doctors have Control over their
O:9
- The number of doctors and dentists has beenown spending on behalf of patients for the first time.
increased by l7, OOO, and the real resources Over 3, OOO GPs will be fundholders by April, caring committed to GP services have doubled since _- for l4 per cent of NHS patients. A vey 2,5OO are l979. preparing to becomeolders in April l993. As a aeresult, new services are being offered at local
- The number of nurses and midwives has gone upsurgeries and health centres. Many general by 69, OOO. practitioners have said that they would like to
~ We have established the independent Pay Review become involved in fund-holding. We have already
Body which nurses had sought for so long, and -_extended the scope of the fund-holding scheme to increased their pay by 43 per cent. It ishard now _ allow general practitioners to provide services such to remember that Labour actually cut nurses’ pay. as community nursing.
Ii)THE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN
The Patient’s Charter sets out clearly what is now m We will, year by year, increase the levelexpected from the NHS. We have already pledged of real resources committed to the NHS. that in future no one will wait more than two years
Savings made through greater efficiencyfor treatment on the NHS. In many parts of the will be ploughed back into the Service. country, for most treatments, the waiting time is
We will develop a comprehensivemuch shorter than this; and we will seek further research and development strategy forProgress in reducing waiting times.
the NHS.
a We will continue to develop the NHSBinding guarantees will be set locally for
Trust movement which placesin-patient waiting times, starting with oeresponsibility for managing hospitalsthe operations where waiting causes
/and other services with local teams whomost distress. To sentine that ad closest to patients. on waiting times continues, we inten are.. P osthat from 3l March l993, no one should a We will continue to encourage thehave to wait more than l8 months for a involvement of doctors and otherhip or knee replacement, or a cataract medical staff in the management ofoperation. We are sure that, as now,. Services. many hospitals will be able to do better a We will introduce powers for nurses tothan this.
prescribe where appropriate. a We will move to a system under which a a We will complete the implementation ofnamed _purse or midwife will beI
Project 2OOO training for nurses. responsible for your care while you are ital.
a We will set goals for the employment ofose.
women in professional and managerialm We will set specific targets for outposts in the NHS. patient waiting times.
uw We will ensure that, following maternitym We will make it easier for patients to find leave or a career break, all womenout what services are available from the aworking in the NHS, including thoseNHS via a new national NHS
C)returning to nursing on a part-time orinformation service.
job-sharing basis, are able to return toWe will ensure that comparative work of a similar status or level to thatinformation about the health standards which they left. achieved by health authorities is a We will ensure that the benefits of fund-available to the public.
- holding arrangements are available tow Simple systems will be set up to allow any GP who wishes to apply, and we willcomplaints to be registered and be ready to extend the scope of the. responses given if things go wrong.
scheme further as it develops. oe
Da STRATEGY FOR HEALTH
HARTThis Government has embarked on the first ever
4 THE PATIENT'S CHARTERstrategy for health. Good health requires more than
No one questions the dedication of those who work good NHS care when people are sick. A variety of in the NHS. But before the Government's reforms, factors - including preventive medicine, diet, the system did not always allow that dedication toexercise, sensible drinking and not smoking - can produce the service which people should be able to contribute substantially to improving health across expect. the whole population.
i II
RESPONSIBILITY FOR OTHERS
Fee eS EEE EE anat eens COO} temas tmmmesaesemneaeaiateemmne semen named narnia aaa aern deena meoneleteteneeeetmeneemnnemneaemeenememmnmenen amend wf CHILDREN a We will set health objectives to ber. achieved by the end of the century, This Government introduced the Children Act, a including reductions in illness andlandmark in legislation to protect children. The Act death from heart disease and cancers. requires childcare facilities to be registered to ensure m We will add new health objectives as thethat standards are maintained throughout the strategy develops. country.
We believe that the diversity of childcare provision in
Csthe UK is one of its strengths. It offers parents real
Da CARE SERVICESchoice. Over 9O per cent of 34 year-olds are engaged y.. in some form of group activity. We shall continue to C
Care services for children, the elderly and theencourage the development of childcare handicapped are provided by local government, arrangements in the voluntary and independent health authorities, the private sector and voluntary sectors, groups, not directly by central government. But government is indirectly involved as the provider ofoo, taxpayers’ money, and through its duty to setw Each local authority will be asked to standards for publicly and privately provided care. produce a Local Childcare Plan setting... out the provision available in their area.
As the number of elderly people in the population; grows, there will be more frail and vulnerable citizensm We will ensure that the standards who need support. Many of them will want to beimplemented through the Children Act cared for at home. Others will need residential orare applied sensibly, and do not nursing home care. It is vital that people should havediscourageprivate orvoluntary choice in the type of care available. In all cases peoplearrangements which are often best must be able to rely on the quality of care. As wesuited to the needs of children and move towards implementation of ‘Caring for People’parents.
in April l993: u We will carry forward a family support: initiative, encouraging the voluntary.. We will take steps to ensure thatsector to work in partnership withC) individuals who need residential orfamilies and local authorities nursing care continue to have a choice of° homes, including independent homes.
Money transferred from the Socialwe
Security budget to local social services4 SOCIAL SECURITY departments will be used for thisl..
urposeOur aim is to improve further and modernise
We ll, that all local authoritiBritain’s social security system. We are providing w We wil ensure that all local authoritiesmore support than ever before - £l4 for every £lO publish information about the socialspent in l979, after allowing for inflation. More services that are available, includingimportantly, this extra help is more clearly focused on information on standards andthose groups with the greatest needs - less well-off complaints procedures. pensioners, disabled people and low income families.. We will provide choice in domiciliaryWe have also sought to provide those on social and’ cay care.. security with better incentives to earn, and gain a we wary pithen i ionaeae intsindependence. AB too often, the old system created vou Jarriers to work and pen: e thrifty.
vital part in the development of’Ps..
community care services. The benefit structure is now more flexible and easier a We will support the organisations whichto unde rstand The new Benefits Agency is help th Ppo hts for friends. andsimplifying forms and widening choice in methods of elp those who care tor friends and - payment. We will complete the massive investment relatives at home. in new technology - Europe's _ biggest eRTHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN computerisation project - that has made it possible I About eight in ten pensioners have some sort of to raise the quality of service to the public. And we second income to top up their state pension. By will extend ‘Helplines’ and other means of assistance abolishing the hated earnings rule we have enabled with individual difficulties. pensioners to keep their retirement pension, even if they take a job in retirement. And we have increased the level of savings that is disregarded in working out a We will continue to simplify socialentitlement to benefits for pensioners. PersonalI security forms wherever possible. pensions have brought real choice into retirementI... provision. Over 4¥, million people have set up their w We will set up a new Family Credit. own pensions since l988. We want to see bothI telephone advice service to supportoccupational and personal provision expand much.
working families. further in the course of the l99Os, (See ‘Opportunity O
We will establish a new agency to carryfor all - A share in the future’ for our proposals on out all social security war pensions workoccupational pensions.) with the aim of providing a better, more efficient service to war pensioners and war widows.
m As evidence of our _ continuing
»commitment to poorer pensioners, we
Lshave announced in the Budget an
SECURITY IN RETIREMENT_ Dude increase of £2 a week for single people,
Britain’s pensioners recognise the security that£3 a week for couples, in income support
Conservative government brings - low inflation, for pensioners. Combined with theI savings that grow, firmness in the face of crime, publicincreases this April, this measure will services that put the customer first. Those who haveprovide less well-off pensioners with dedicated their lives to the service of the communitybetween £5.75 and £lO.7O a week extra.
deserve that stabilitya We will continue to pay, from April l993, I
We will continue to give the fight against inflation oura rebate at the level recommended by theI first priority. The basic state retirement pension willGovernment Actuary for all those who© remain the foundation for retirement. We willcontract out of the State Earningscontinue to protect its value against price rises, as we: Related Pension Scheme.
have for the last l3 years.
w We will legislate to provide a new l per
_ We also recognise that some pensioners, who have nocent incentive for holders of personal savings or pensions from their jobs, need extra help. pensions aged 3O and over from April
So we will increase the additional support, already upl993, when the existing incentive ends.
by over £3OO million a year since l989, available to less well-off pensioners. a We will consider proposals for a new
The number of those over pensionable age will be farom al rebates to come of to eet higher in the next century than it is today. If we dothat personal pensions remain attractive not make provision now, the burden we will place onacross the age range our children will be too great. That is why we must° encourage people to build up savings, investments, a We are firmly committed to equal and occupational and personal pensions, treatment for men and women in
But Labour policy is hostile to such personal effort; pensions. Following assessment of theI
Labour wants pensioners to depend on the State. vill bring bor ard levislation aparie we
Failure to control inflation meant that pensioners’hi ring torware’ legislation to achieve incomes from savings were cut under the last Labourthis. I
Government..
- TTTI. RESPONSIBILITY FOR OTHERS; ere nt NA
4 SUPPORTING FAMILIESat present get no such help. Disability WorkingI; Allowance will make it easier for disabled peopleI
Our reforms have cut away the barriers that meant:
};. to take up a job.
many breadwinners lost money if they went to work.
Family Credit has transformed the prospects of
35O, OOO low-income families. As a result ofmu We are introducing new disability improvements since l988, we have made availablebenefits which will, in the nextI an extra cae milion ‘a yen in real terms to low-Parliament, bring extra help to at least incomees with children.3OO, OOO people. By l99394 these and
‘But we also recognise that all families face extra costsother improvements will mean that weC) in bringing up children. So we have raised Childwill be directing an extra £3OO million a
Benefit. For a two-child family the increases we areyear to long-term sick and disabled making will, by April l992, have raised the total valuepeople.
of Child Benefit by almost £3 in a single year, toThe Independent Living Fund has
£l7.45 a week,°proved a great success in giving severely
Our new Child Support Agency will make sure thatdisabled people an opportunity to live inI absent parents make a proper contribution - and thatthe community, We are committed toI far more lone parents and their children get themaintaining a fund which supports theI maintenance that is theirs by right. And benefitmost severely disabled people.
changes make it easier for more families - including single parents - to combine work and family responsibilities.
m Child Benefit will remain the’ f THE VOLUNTARY SECTOR cornerstone of our policy for all familiesCharities and v...
°. oy: oluntary groups play a vital role in our with children. Its value will increase eachnational life. Britain is rich in its citizens’ willingness yWIRD prices. to give time, effort and money to helping others. We C) a Child Benefit will continue to be paidhave a great tradition of voluntary work at home and to all families, normally to the mother, andoverseas. There are now about 35O, OOO voluntary in respect of all children. groups in Britain - and personal donations to charities now amount to some £5, OOO million a year.
We have done much to boost charitable giving.
of HELP FOR DISABLED PEOPLE- Under the Payroll Giving Scheme, employees can
Under the Conservatives, more disabled people thannow contribute up to £5O a month tax-free.
ever before are getting the help they need and - Gifts and bequests have been exempted from deserve. Since l979, the number receivingInheritance Tax.
Attendance Allowance has more than trebled; the*t. Atws.
number receiving Mobility Allowance has risen six- The Gift Aid oo nie of mene thas. eiaim ~I fold; the number receiving Invalid Care Allowancechange just announced in the Budget has risen 25fold. Today we spend some £l2, OOOange J° million a year on benefits for long-term sick and © - The maximum limit on single charitable gifts disabled people. Even after allowing for inflation, qualifying for Income and Corporation Tax relief that is 2¥, times as much as Labour spent in thehas been abolished.
l97Os. The new Charities legislation will ensure that
~ Disability Living Allowance will bring together _ charities are better managed and properly regulated.
the existing Attendance and Mobility Allowance, I We believe this will enhance public confidence in providing new help to many disabled people who -_ charities and further boost charitable giving.
ITHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN
The Government gives some £2,5OO million a yearto have successfully pressed for an EC ban on the support the activities of the voluntary sectorimportation of baby seal products and of furs from
(including housing associations). Industry has beenthose countries which permit leghold traps.
generous with its sponsorship and with technical We have set up the Farm Animal Welfare Council and support. But money is not the only contribution that rave brought in welfare codes covering livestock on government and business can make. Businesses havefarms and in transit. We are establishing an ethical become much more practically involved in work in committee to look at the effects of advanced the community. And government could do more totechniques in animal breeding. We have banned the encourage new forms of volunteering, to encourageuse of veal crates, and taken action to ensure humane the most effective use of the money it gives, and toslaughter. We insisted that we should retain our bring together voluntary effort at the local andpower to stop the export of live horses. At Maastricht
C) national level. we secured a landmark in animal welfare: our partners’ agreement to a declaration that the welfare mw We will continue to support the work ofof animals should be taken into account in the the voluntary sector and promoteframing of EC legislation.
volunteering. We now have the toughest set of controls on animal a We will work with voluntary agencies toexperimentation in Europe, and the number of develop, over the life of the nextanimals used in experiments has fallen steadily. We
Parliament, a national bank ofhave supported stronger laws to protect badgers and information on opportunities forstop cruel tethering, and have increased the penalties volunteering. for organising animal fights and for cruelty.
wg We will encourage efforts to improve the coordination and promote the growth ofuw We will introduce a Wildlife local volunteer support, building on theEnhancement Scheme and expand the success of Neighbourhood Watch toSpecies Recovery Scheme, both to be develop a network of voluntary help inrun by English Nature.
local communities. m We have tightened controls on the import of wild birds and will press the
©)eer)EC to do the same.
4a ANIMAL WELFAREu We oppose resumption of the trade in
We are leading the European Community in ourivory or elephant products, and will achievements in improving animal welfare. We haveprovide additional support for elephant also taken action at home and abroad to improveconservation projects in Africa.
conservation, and will continue to do so. a We will urge our EC partners to bring
English Nature, which advises the Government onanimal welfare standards up to UK wildlife issues, has embarked on an ambitiouslevels, for example by banning veal programme to restore endangered species. Thecrates and stalls and tethers for pigs. We
Wildlife and Countryside Act l98l provides specialwill press them to put into practice the protection for 3O4 species of birds and animals, asprinciples of the Maastricht declaration.
well as protecting our heritage of wild plants. mw We will use our EC Presidency to
We are firmly opposed to international trade in raretoughen up EC regulations and improve and protected species such as rhinoceroses, EC ‘compliance with rules governing cheetahs, leopards, and bears. We have pushedanimal experiments.’ successfully for an EC ban on large-scale drift netsa We will press for higher EC standards that threatened dolphins, and we support the UNfor the keeping of battery hens and for resolution calling for a moratorium on their use. Wethe care of animals in transit. -
Support I the a ot eaapbieeinebenea We will not accept any weakening of our resolutions against ‘scientific’ hunting of whales. Werabies prevention safeguards.
l]: THE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAINI
A BRIGHTER BRITAIN
Making Britain a brighter and better place in which to live requires a high quality physicalI environment - including housing, transport and reinvigorated urban areas. The Conservative commitment is both to the recreation of our civic pride and also to the preservation and integrity of our rural heritage, founded on the core industry of agriculture. Our aim is to enhance the quality of life for the British people.
Da HOME OWNERSHIP.. We will put more of the Housi
The opportunity to own a home and pass it on is one°. Phonlg of the most important rights an individual has in asorporation’s acral million budgetO free society. Conservatives have extended that right. ThE will * vible. fire ared ownership.
It lies at the heart of our philosophy. We want to seel8enable first time buyers to wealth and security being passed down fromchoose a home and buy a share of it - generation to generation. Some 4 million moreusually 5O per cent - with a housing householders own their own homes compared withthes wich a paying ine that the rest until l979. The number of former council tenants who€y wish to increase their stake in the have bought their homes has risen to l.4 million. Property.
We now need to make it easier for those council7 lesisloton er ‘Commonhold' tenants living in high-cost areas or on low incomes to> I, SIV move gradually into home ownership, without takingresseholders living in blocks o flats the on too heavy a financial burden at any one time. Thisbie ke the mack € treeho rs their will bring the benefits of home ownership within thehi he¢ db, et rate. aascho ders reach of more people and introduce more diversity. of hig <r mb othe. fe ke id r gwen in local authority estates. We also want to help more€ right le ch l de ee he d of their leaseholders to own and control the management ofProperty. Leascholders who live in a their property. block which does not qualify will have aI new right to buy an extended lease. I
But we recognise that not everyone can, or will wantWe will introdime limiO to, buy his or her home. So we are determined tof © wit Intro be local Peacets encourage a strong private rented sector whileOr answers Dy ‘focal authorities to continuing to safeguard the rights of existingstandard inquiries by house-buyers, and regulated tenants. Bringing empty private sectorexplore the idea of a new computerised dwellings back into use will extend choice, make itproperty Data peo ringing roeeth er easier for people to move jobs, and help tackleinformation heid by the Land Registry homelessness, and other public bodies. I. m We will extend nation-wide the schemeI. aliefwe have piloted to increase private
We will maintain mortgage tax relief.. renting, whereby housing associations m We will continue ‘Right to Buy’manage properties, building trust discounts, and ensure that localbetween tenant and private sector authorities respond reasonably andlandlord.
rapidly to applications. ms As soon as possible in the new a We will introduce a new nation-wideParliament, we will introduce * hi
‘Rents to Mortgages’ scheme, enablingh ent a ve will be able al er council tenants to take a part-share inlodeces witha havi anic to let won the their home, gradually stepping up to fullgers without having to pay tax on the ownership. rent they receive. I.33IST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN oe MEETING HOUSING NEEDTh
We are al‘e Governm::
council so committed to securing a better deal fotackling the rob Is spending about £lOO million ts and increasing thrAsem of rough sleeping is affordable housing fg the supply ofa result we haveping in our cities introduce housing ' or those in housing need. We willwho sleep rough on ure a sharp fall in the numbers estates andoice, improve managemthe voluntur streets. Working closely with
C s and create new rights as part of ie ent of f, th ary sector we will continue torr harter. Our aim will be to gi part o' e Tenant’sr those sleeping rough, P articularly i provide help landlord whereD€ to give tenants a choice ofy in the capital.
of both peek ped eaten and make management. ousing associati..
Oresponsive to the needs of i 3 ssociation stock moreWe wit revolutionise the management of
*.. OU:
managed by beinein way in which council housing iscompetitive cendering will ela wet, ging in new private. authorities to bring iige local operating on contract to the Isector providersdemo bring in managers wh sntroduce more competi le local authority. We willonstrate their ability to deliO.. tit, best servieliver the aevountabj services o the enent choice, therebya We sal nes O tenants es: O house in which they Kemselves to improve the flat orcouncilproperties _dranefer of
We have alreadassociations. But in ordsing y begun aman: order to bri nants to opt to transfert: authority°e limit on the num wish to see this aerate diveray nce leash iation, Weof properties transferred in a single and will therefore act to limit the A ot monopoly,.
can be transferred. size of blocks thatm We will give tenants a new Ri housing associations. Over g is now being built byeae nents for certain home. are committed to spend© years, weprovements which they undertal
C)through the Hou spend nearly £6, OOO millionAnd we will improve the existi coe l53, OOO homes. sing Corporation to provi deto Repair. ting Right
We willLow We will contin.
by cen I do more to pang into use properties ownedHousing Acton Teast peepee and vernment which. whichgrammes empty for no good reWhich are standing; concentrate resource house more people pave ha wall enable us toworst council estates. s on the cases, to provide more oanc, In somem We will enable tenant homesteading. pportunities forHousing Action Trusts to bart apply for: eo
Through Estate Action and Housi: improve the worst estates. ver and we have invested £l, OOO milli ising Action Trustsa We will work wi concentrated attackon in recent years in aCo‘with the Housi ck on the co ’: rporation to. Ing estates. Suntry’s worst housinOmbestablish a ne improved ome 36O, OOO dwellings have be gmbudsman for housing associati wv ed as a result. As part of thentenants. We will alson on which: ose programm: C*Oo encourage th we are committederes, orporation to ext d8e
£l,4OO million o thto spend a furthertenant involen opportunities for demolishinver the next three years, wf involvement in the manage ccg or redesigning tower blocks a we areof housing association properti gement
Wherever we rebuilding on a more h and detmw We willeeI erever we can, whuman scale. will set up a Task Force - headed by wh, whenever tenants want ian independent chai: ed bY ere resources allow, we will pull down thit, andemptychairman - to help bring which have blotted our cityscaceyesaesproperti governmentresidential provided breeding grounds pes and too oftenPheer hee back ae use. These will elinquency. crime andSold or et on sh
Cy., to those in housing nee re term leases eea. I
I: A BRIGHTER BRITAINI
We believe that the bestI m As part of Estate Action we willand lasting ronermenta on the relives no ondI introduce a new pilot scheme to promoteBR's state monopoly. We want to restore the pride homesteading. Local authorities will beand local commitment that died with nationalisation.
encouraged to offer those in housing_ We want to give the private sector the opportunity toI need the sabre pro erties. andoperate existing rail services and introduce new ones, I exchange, homesteaders will pay a lowerfor both passengers and freight.
rent or be able to buy at a reduced price. A significant number of companies have already saidI that they want to introduce new railway services asI soon as the monopoly is ended. We will give them; I
8CO) weathat chance.
4 TRANSPORT
Our plans for the railways are designed to bring
Under the Conservatives, transport in Britain is better services for all passengers as rapidly as being transformed. More competition on the roads _ possible. We believe that franchising provides the and in the air has led to better services and more best way of achieving that. Long term, as. choice. Our successful policies of deregulation and -_- performance improves and services become more ptivatisation have gone hand in hand with a I commercially attractive as a result of bringing in sustained and growing programme of investment. private sector disciplines, it will make sense to
Over l, OOO miles of new trunk roads and motorway _ consider whether some services can be sold outright.
have been built, more than lOO bypasses constructed, and some 75O miles of railwayI electrified. Airlines now operate 5O per cent more; flights. More people travel further and more easilyIn the next Parliament:
than ever before. By franchisiwill cive the pei; a By franchising, wegive the private
Over the next three years we are committed tothe -S__ sector the fullest opportunity to operate iggest investment in Britain’s transportexisting passenger railway services.
infrastructure in our historyI
We will also seek further opportunities forthe private. Rea ftandards of f Punctuality, O sector to contribute, as it has for example with the: quailty.-nl
Channel Tunnel, the OElizabeth l Bridge atspecified by franchises; subsidy will anne! tunnel, the Neen eemcge acontinue to be provided where necessary;
Dartford, the second Severn Bridge and thea4 fame:. rrangements to sustain the current
Birmingham Northern Ring Road We intend thenational network of services will be proposed new rail lim the Channel Tunnel to“tained:-ticketing wi
King’s Cross to be taken forward by the privatern and through-ticwillbe sector.
Anew Rail Regulator - who will ensure
Oethat al companies pave fair access to the track - will ae franchises an
4 THE RAILWAYSmake sure that the franchisees honour
We believe that the railways can play a bigger Par inthe terms of the contract.
responding to Britain's growing transport needs, an..
are investing accordingly. Next year alone, Britisha BR's accounting systems and internal
Rail’s external finance will top £2, OOO million. Thestructures will be reorganised. One part new Passenger’s Charter will help to raise the qualityof BR will continue to be responsible for of service. For the first time ever performance targetsall track and infrastructure. The will be set, widely published and rigorouslyoperating side of BR will continue to monitored; fare levels will reflect the standards set; provide passenger services until they are and discounts will be paid to regular travellers wherefranchised out to the private sector.
performance targets are not met.
eeTHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN... In spite of the benefits they bring, cars carry an a The franchise areas will be decided onlyenvironmental cost. In Britain catalytic » onverters after technical discussions with BR. Butwill be compulsory on all new cars from the end of our aim will be to franchise out servicesl992. This will eliminate virtually all harmful exhaust in such aie * to reflect regional andgases, except for the emission of CO,. The only; pride isfuel efficiency. Action is needed at international level our railways and to recapture the spiritand we will play our full part.
of the old regional companies. heFP.,.. Buses have an increasingly important part to play.
a We will cell BR's freight operationsThe deregulation of long-distance coach services has outright. We will also sell its parcelsled°‘on in reliable and ch business. ed to a major expansion in reliable and cheap
C)services. Bus deregulation outside London has w We will be prepared to sell stations -increased mileage by l6 per cent. We now propose which we want to be centres of activity -to take deregulation and privatisation further.
either to franchisees or independent companies.
w The Railway Inspectorate will be givenWe will improve road transport by:
full powers to ensure the highestw Investing £6,3OO million in our trunk standards of safety. road and motorway network over the mext three years, concentrating, particularly on bypasses. Some 4O new
Leones will be opened by l995 on trunk
4 ROADSroads alone.
Nine out of every ten journeys, whether passenger orm Increasing penalties for those convicted freight, are made by road. We must thereforeof drink driving.
continue to provide an efficient road network. In them Installing cameras at dangerous road years ahead we will concentrate particularly on thejunctions to film those who drive: bypass programme. through red traffic lights.
©)As part of the Citizen’s Charter, we will bring forwardmw Encouraging local councils, assisted by reforms which will enable the private sector to starta special budget we have set aside, to filling the gaps in the motorway service area networkintroduce pedestrian priority areas and and to introduce more variety. Rather than large, cycle lanes.
intrusive stations at long intervals we should seePrivatising thining 39 local smaller, more frequent service areas providing a. authority bus companies.
much wider range of facilitiesDeregulating buses in London and
We will investigate ways of speeding up, within theptivatising the London Buses
Department of Transport, the procedures forsubsidiaries. A new London Bus building new roads. We will continue our campaignExecutive will be responsible for busto keep ‘coning off’ on motorways to a minimum bystops, stands and stations and for extending lane rental schemes, under whichcontracting out socially necessary contractors who fall behind schedule incur financialservices. The concessionary fares penalties. Next year two-thirds of all motorwayscheme in London will continue.
maintenance work will be carried out in this way. u Changing the system under which
Britain has the best road safety record in themotorway service areas are provided.
European Community, In spite of the vastlya Encouraging action internationally, and increased volume of traffic, fewer people are nowwithin our own motor industry, to killed on our roads than at any time since l948. Ourpromote more fuel-efficient vehicles.
aim is to improve on that record still further.,36 rrII
A BRIGHTER BRITAINI
4 AVIATION AND SHIPPINGLondon Underground is planning to invest £3,5OO ae. million over the next three years. It has introduced
More alk aan lo a evtanes "That i “why choice, an ambitious Company Plan which will lead to better better services and lower fares. Ihat is why we nave - service, cleaner trains and more staff at stations and been pressing within the EC for full liberalisation of I Gy, platforms. Their new Charter will be published services. We also want to see more transatlantic shortly. P flights, particularly to regional airports. People in theoe regions should not have to travel to London in orderResponsibility for the Docklands Light Railway has to fly to the United States. Direct flights would boost been transferred to the London DocklandsI local economies and apply downward pressure on Development Corporation. As its performance fares. The key regional airports are still in local continues to improve, we expect to see growingI authority ownership. They should be well placed to _rivate sector interest in purchasing it outright. OO) benefit from an increase in the number of direct pointto-point flights. But if they are really to growm We will seek to privatise the Docklands and prosper, they need access to private capital, freedLight Railway during the lifetime of the from the constraints of public ownership. next Parliament.
Air safety cannot be compromised. Over the nextu The new Jubilee Line is bei rareanaing extended five ill the Civ! Aviation Authority will investto Docklands and South East London
£75O million in modernising its systems. and will be followed by the East-West
More can be done to cut some of the regulatoryCrossrail, linking Paddington toI burdens our shipping industry faces. We will ensureLiverpool Street. The Docklands Light that the recommendations of the Government-Railway is being extended at an eventual
Industry Joint Working Party are put into effect ascost of £8OO million. I rapidly as possible. w London Underground’s Charter will setI a We will further liberalise transatlanticout tougher new standards and what itI air services and encourage morewill do to compensate passengers shouldI: international flights to and fromit fail to meet those standards.. regional airports. aI
°e. eCe a We eitaipore local authorities toDa LOCAL GOVERNMENTI a We will reduce airport congestion byLocal councillors - some 25, OOO men and womenI increasing the capacity of our air trafficthroughout Britain - are responsible for some of our control. most important public services. Since l979 we haveI m We will continue to campaign within thesought to create an accountable local government
EC for further _ liberalisation, system capable of delivering high quality local services particularly of cabotage, so that there areat a price that local people are prepared to pay. I more commercial opportunities forConservatives councils in shires, districts and cities
British companies. have been at the forefront of these reforms. In a
CPresponsive and efficient manner, they have
Da LONDON’S TRANSPORTdemonstrated how to deliver good services at an
%affordable price. I
A major programme of renewal and modernisation isll3have:
transforming public transport in London - includingOver the pasyeas we. ve; I the biggest expansion of London’s rail network since ~ held down unjustified rises in the cost of local the l93Os. government; I
The £75O million upgrading of the Central Line is © - abolished the power of local councils to shift the already under way, to be followed by a similarburden of taxation on to local business, for the programme on the Northern Line; the Jubilee Linefirst time limiting the overall rise in business ratesI extension and Crossrail will follow. to no more than the rate of inflation; I.37 esITHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN
I- abolished an expensive and bureaucratic layer of. i.
government in London and other big cites;” Citiser’s Charter to local governmene
- developed the local authority role from directrequiting the publication of more; provider to effective enabler, encouraging manyinformation which will enable local tenants to buy their own homes, allowing schoolspeople to judge the efficiency of their the freedom to manage their own affairs andcouncils in providing services.
improving the quality of local services by allowingum We will continue to ‘cap’ local spending private business to compete for contracts. where necessary. P
Labour threaten all these reforms. They wouldu As we announced in the Budget, no
‘uncap’ local spending, leading to higher local andone’s Uniform Business Rate will go up national taxes. They would ‘uncap’ business rates, this year by more than the rate of
C)threatening a return to the l98Os when the Englishinflation - 4. l per cent. And we have rate poundage rose 37 per cent more than inflation. speeded up the benefits of revaluation
They would abolish the requirement on localfor those businesses who gain from it.
authorities to seek value for money throughu In future years, we will maintain our competitive tendering. They would remove theledge to prevent UBR poundage rising freedom of local communities to preserve theirby more ‘han inflation grammar schools. They would introduce a new,:,,: expensive layer of government bureaucracy atmw We will replace the Community Charge tregional level. They would return local governmentwith a new Council Tax in April l993.
ifinance to the bad old days of domestic rates, withThe Council Tax will be simple and unrestrained power for local councils to chargestraightforward to administer. It will be: householders as much as they like. And they wouldfair and will rightly reflect both the value abolish the Audit Commission, which not onlyof the property and the number of adults maintains the probity of local governmentwho live in it.
accounting, but also pioneered the drive for betteru Single householders, who suffered quality of service and value for money in localunder the rates, will receive a 25 per cent government. discount. By grouping properties into a. limited number of bands, the Council
~We now propose further reforms in the structure, Tax also avoids the punitive bills which
C)finance and accountability of local government. Inwould be imposed by an unfettered the meantime, we have transferred a further share ofrating system of the kind proposed by the burden of financing local services to central* Labour. Students and people on low government. Today, local community chargepayersincomes will not have to pay.
bear only a small proportion of the cost of local councils. eS) f CITIES a We will set up a commission to examine, We take pride in our cities. Right across Britain they area by ipa aannn Lie Naa a)have been given a new lease of life. From London to
Local communities will be fullyGlasgow, from Cardiff 4 Newcastle, nen consulted and their loyalties andbuildings have been restored and areas w!
interests will be central to thebeen run down have been transformed. The £4, OOO commission’s task in deciding whethermillion Action for Cities programme underlines the in any area a single tier of localConservative commitment to our inner cities and the. government could provide betterpeople who live there. It highlights our accountability and greater efficiency. determination to spread opportunity as widely ss m We are looking at ways in which thepossible. We want all our peopic to share in growing internal management of local authoritiesprosperity and to have a stake in the country’s future.
i: Much has been achieved in recent years. The Urban might become more effective.;:
Development Corporations and the wide range of eeeA BRIGHTER BRITAINI central government grants have helped to regenerateitself be able to develop land in partnership with the many of our inner city areas. But more remainstobe _ private sector. This represents a major step forward done. in unlocking the commercial potential of our inner
The best way to restore the spirit of enterprise whichcities and of breathing new life into areas which mayI first made our cities great is for local people, theave Deen cerelict tor many years.
private sector, the voluntary sector and local andBut our focus is not just on physical regeneration.
central government, to work together in partnership. We want to see more opportunities for training, more
That is the principle which lies behind Cityencouragement to enterprise, better education and
Challenge. Its new approach of Sompetitive biddingmore measures to tackle drugs and crime.
has already galvanized towns and cities into bringing. ar...
forward imaginative proposals for regeneration. ItEneour ding new bone hunitien fe the neaoloved C)I has improved coordination, secured better value forare bai al to our rs city policies ‘Remotivating a ble and encouraged progr x. which tackle individuals and providing the right conditions for problemsbusiness are the only ways to make lasting change. I mw We will continue to extend City.
Challenge’ and allocate a greaterm We will offer the Loan GuaranteeI proportion of resources by competitiveScheme for small firms on moreI: bidding. generous tens 3 in inner city areas. The: scheme wiextended from TaskI m We will support Urban DevelopmentForce areas to include successful CityI
Corporations in their critical task o: Challenge bidders.7I urban regeneration.. Co
We will bri thPm We will make more people eligible forI " targete d wince city prost eames ceeto aour successful Job Interview GuaranteeI single budget. This will mean thatSone vith bead jobs. PiI funding will go where it is most needed.
locally rather than according to a set ofa We will carry out pilot projects for theI priorities determined in Whitehall. foyer’ concept, whereby young peopleO.. are given a place in a host in a We will strengthen the machinery for coexchange they give a commitment toI ordination in the regions. New, train and look for work.
integrated regional offices of the“ea; appropriate Whitehall departments willWe will pilot a number of ‘back to work be established so that business and localbonus schemes in inner city areas for theI government will have only one port oflong-term unemployed.
call. m We will extend customised trainingI m We will establish a new Urbanunder the Job Link programme to
Regeneration Agency to pull togetherinclude City Challenge areas. I our efforts to clear up and developa We will make inner city Task Force andI derelict land, helping to bring it backCity Challenge areas eligible for regionalI into commercial use and provide newinnovation grants.
opportunities for local people.
Working in the urban areas, the URA will administerwe paige to ned ok down. cnn’ and to
Of the Environment Trail have « dudl fanedem, HIP Prepare young people for the world of workI
First, outside the existing UDC areas, it will reclaim The City Technology Colleges show what can beI derelict land, assembling suitable sites for done. They are overwhelmingly popular with parentsI redevelopment using vesting or compulsory and pupils and are doing much to raise standards for purchase powers where necessary. Second, it willchildren of all abilities in the inner cities. I.39I aITHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN
Under the Citizen’s Charter, we shall soon be ableto -_responsibility for coordinating London’s transport. identify much more precisely than ever before those services. London’s place as a world centre for schools which are delivering unacceptably low _ financial and insurance services is pre-eminent; we standards. So will parents. We will publish test intend to keep it that way. And we will support the results, exam results and truancy rates and ensure _ vigorous cultural life of the capital, which has seen that there is regular independent inspection. This new galleries, theatres and museums opening over will enable us to put the spotlight on those inner city _ the last decade.
LEAs and schools which are failing their pupils.
a We will launch a London 2OOO initiative.
We will continue to seek opportunitiesm We will convene a new private sector to open new CTCs in deprived inner cityforum to promote London’s position
C)areas. internationally.
m We will ensure that more schools, m We will establish a new Cabinet subespecially in the ne cvelen have I l€committee to coordinate policy on rehnologizal xpertise sve? TMLondon.
ee.
a We will give a single Transport Minister
‘Tackling crime and the fear of crime forms a vital partHewill ibility for servi sport wo ane of the strategy to make our inner cities better placesGroup which will bring together public to live and work. The Safer Cities initiative, launchedtransport operators - from both publi in l988, has successfully brought together localiehdet ecpnahnla tanpupae in,; oo. and private sectors - to discuss transport groups and agencies to tackle crime in some of our:,; issues in London.
worst affected urban areas. Twenty schemes are iPalready in operation.. THE COUNTRYSIDE ma We will double the number of Safera.
Cities Schemes to cover 4O urban areas. We have always cared for the countryside. We: support its major industries and way of life, while
©O~recognising the place it holds in the hearts of those
4 LONDONwho live in towns.
“sy
London i. d busifWe want to protect our most beautiful landscapes, nm ® the a oa Sin l979 an have int stedconserve the abundance and variety of our wildlife across the world. since f7/2_ we have investeand habitats, promote access and public enjoyment; heavily to secure that status. Billions of pounds haveof the countryside, and encourage public gone into improving air, rail and underground links. te cptan fe etn f:
We will continue that programme of modernisation. participation in caring for the countryside.
We are determined to sustain into the next century But the countryside is more than just a pretty picture.
London’s special position as one of the world’s -_It is a place where people live and work, as they have leading capital cities. We reject Labour’s plan to -_ done in the past and will do in the future. In recreate a bureaucratic and wasteful GLC. Instead, _ providing our public services, we will continue to as part of our Millennium programme, wewilllaunch _ recognise the particular needs of people who live in a London 2OOO initiative. The Secretary of State for the countryside.
the Environment will convene a new private sector.; forum to promote London internationally as a.‘.
business, tourist and cultural centre. The Secretarym We will continue to promote a diverse:°:: rural economy, balancing the need for
_ of State will also chair a new Cabinet sub-committee:, ae: eejobs, housing and services in rural areas to bring together Ministers from all key departments°°,,. with protection of the rural and coordinate policy for the further improvementenvironment of London. A single Minister will be given°
4OA BRIGHTER BRITAINI
_aaI
IIf AGRICULTUREI a We will publish target response times for
Centuries of farming have shaped our countryside. grant and licence applications made to
Now farming is at a crossroads, both here and in thethe Ministry of Agriculture.
rest of the European Community. World-wide. I pressure to reduce protectionist measures, and the. We ies forward the roposals forI need to contain the cost of the Common Agriculturaltenancy laws in order to mal is are
Policy, mean that farmers will face reduced supportavailable for rent, especial! for n and increased competition. entrants. peciallyew!
We believe that farming in the UK can meet these.:. I challenges. But many farmers will need help to adapt. We will ee tone eile pollutionC) to the new conditions, and we will continue tofarmers to meet the high stan deeds provide assistance. required.5I
It will become increasingly important for farmers tom We will press for an agreement in th obtain a greater proportion of their income from theEC's Agric ultural Couneil whi ch will market. We will encourage farmers, retailers andallow us to rovide financial manufacturers to work together to increase our shareencouragement for & anic agri of the European food market.88gticulture.
We are committed to reducing the burden of Cc. I regulation on business in general, and farming inL f FORESTRYI particular. We will not accept UK farmers being put at a disadvantage by EC laws being appliedForestry is a traditional rural industry, which also differently in other countries. affects the landscape, and gives pleasure to millionsI;.. of people. The needs of a successful industry,; Responsible farmers have always combined efficient -_Jandscape conservation, and public access must all farming with care for the countryside. We will 4, accommodated; and we will reorganise the continue to encourage this approach through Forestry Commission to reflect these objectivesI schemes to protect landscape and habitats of specialmore effectively. I importance. We will also maintain direct support for, farming in the Less Favoured Areas in ways whichWe will plant a new national forest in theC)I encourage good environmental practice. Midlands and community forestsI elsewhere.
mw We will seek a reform of the CAP whicha We will review the effectiveness of the brings agriculture closer to the market; current incentives for forestryI reduces the costs to taxpayers andinvestment.
consumers; is implemented at a pace;.
which the industry can bear; affects alla We will Produce guidance Fo “the
Community _ farmersequitably, Or nenies de toc r icative Porestry regardless of size or location; andStrategies while s to encourage new recognises the importance ofho ands, while steering planting away environmental protection. m sensitive areas. I a We will build on the producer marketingoe initiatives which we have alreadyPa FISHING launched, including the GroupSeas..
Marketing Grant. Fishing pis avital industry in many parts of our islandsI.:.. any fishermen have done well in recent years but mw We will assist the Milk Marketingthey now face great pressure on the fish stocks. This
Board’s move to a new structure whichmeans that fishing quotas are likely to fall in coming ible to protect the interest:
o podaeere an d Pvonsumers in "heyears in order to preserve the long-term future of theI
Single Marketfisheries. We will continue to work for the profitable ingte°‘and sustainable future of our fishing fleet. I
4lI
TOiITHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN.
a We are determined to see that the. m We will continue to assist local renegotiation of the Common Fisheriesauthorities who want to subsidise rural.
Policy protects the interests of (UKtransport.
shermen and retains our share of the. ne:
Community’s fishing opportunities. ma We will enable village schools that wish to apply for Grant-Maintained status to a We will introduce a balanced package ofdo so in small groups, thus enabling measures, including decommissioningthem to share management tasks while and controls on fishing activity, tostill enjoying the benefits of. conserve fish and safeguard the future ofindependence.
©the industry.
a The expansion of GP fund-holding will
Cebring particular benefits to rural areas
£ RURAL JOBS AND SERVICESbecause of the convenience of different;. services - such as physiotherapy and
Changes in agriculture and other traditionalconsultant appointments - being offered industries will affect employment opportunities inin the GP’s surgery.
the countryside. We will continue to target help through the Rural Development Commission, and ask the RDC to review the Rural Development Areat~ to ensure that its efforts are targeted on the areas ou most need. We are committed to developing tourism4h CARING FOR THE COUNTRYSIDE in ways which provide all-year-round jobs and bring Some of our finest landscapes are designated as benefit to less well-known parts of our countryside, National Parks. All National Park authorities will without damaging the environment. We have become independent Boards, which will make it recently published new planning policy guidance _- easier for them to carry out their tasks effectively.
which makes it clear how the countryside can benefit The New Forest will be given a statutory status which from new businesses and jobs, if the location and yi} give it as great a level of protection as any
Odesign of development are handled with sensitivity. National Park.
In local government, many of ouF shire counties andLast summer the Government launched an districts have led the way in raising the quality ofexperiment in ‘Countryside Stewardship’. This aims public chools. Jocal post offices, local Jew ol andto conserve, enhance and recreate fine landscapes
Oca" s¢ » rural life. an important role to play inso that they may be enjoyed and appreciated by the sustaining€. public. The response from farmers landowners and: environmental bodies has been very positive. We. We a consult lancin recentl ytherefore propose to expand the scheme and to pu las cda d P“4. ceintroduce a new scheme to preserve hedgerows - a guidance cesigned to provide a Clearmuch valued feature of the English landscape, and a framework for decisions onhaven for wildlife developments to aid tourism., m We will widen the availability of theThe Government endorsed and supported the
Rural Development Commission’sCountryside Commission S target designed to bring successful Redundant Buildings Grantl2O, OOO miles of rights of way into good order by the
Scheme, and strengthen other RDCend of the century.
programmes. At parish level, individuals can work together either a We will maintain ourspecialto safeguard the character of their local village, or to rogrammes to romote affordab leimprove its appearance. action can sO fonees in rural orev. preserve local wildlife and habitats. Under the Rural
Wfullitted to maintainEnvironmental Action Scheme, grants of up to m We are juny Commilted to maintaining @£2, OOO per project will be available to support local national network of post offices. environmental action as 6 asI
A BRIGHTER BRITAINI
The Government is keen to promote the fullest _ from the stratosphere to the street corner. We willI possible use of inland waterways for leisure, continue to publish annual progress reports.
recreation and amenity, in the regeneration of inner...
cities and for freight transport where appropriate. This Cc onservative Government has taken a lead m:. working to protect the ozone layer. We will strive to, But we recognise that the various uses of canals and\thdicati¢delet rivers must be properly managed to protect thea betes € eradication of ozone depleting character and environment of the waterways. substances. I
One of the most important issues facing all countries. d th Cidis the threat of global warming. Effective action to
- We ree -_ _ ountrysid ecombat global warming must be international action.5I nme §jain we have taken a lead. The Prime Minister was contiowe of istorie peaneenainthe first world leader to announce his intention toI meadows, paatSsattend the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro this June.
Public access to qualifying schemes willWe have said that we will consider stabilising our be encouraged. CO, emissions earlier than our existing conditional a We will introduce a Hedgerow Incentivetarget of 2OO5. We have promised to provide new and. Scheme to help preserve hedgerows ofadditional resources to help the developing countries particular historic, landscape or wildlifeto tackle their environmental problems. I importance. Within Britain, and ahead of other EuropeanI
We will contribute to the Countrysidecountries, we have introduced the concept ofI
Commission’s new Parish Pathintegrated pollution control.
Partnership designed to stimulate localWe have set up, for the first time, powerful comaintenance and --improvementordinating machinery within Whitehall to ensure that schemes. environmental considerations are given due weight m We will continue to support thein all decision-making. I development and redevelopment of ourWe are committed to openness on environmental canals, as well as enhancing thematters. We support the establishment of aI environmental standards of ourEuropean Environment Agency to provide aO waterways. Europe-wide environmental database. We believe that the public should have access to information held by the pollution control authorities. Public registers are now provided by bodies such as the
UoNational Rivers Authority and Her Majesty's
£ THE ENVIRONMENTInspectorate of Pollution.
The Conservative Party’s commitment to theI environment is beyond doubt. Other parties promisea We will establish a new Environment the earth. We have taken action - both nationally andAgency which will bring together the internationally - to preserve it. functions of the National Rivers
*e+.4
Environmental protection can impose financial costspeor Her Majesty s aaa i ofI on producers, consumers and taxpayers, so we mustfan ution fl ocal _ teeitic FeonI make sure the threat of damage is a real one. But wections Oaes. I also accept the precautionary principle - the need toa The new EA will have a statutory duty toI act, where there is significant risk of damage, beforepublish an annual State of ‘theI the scientific evidence is conclusive. jind weEnvironment report. I recognise that higher environmental standards can..; offer new opportunities for business., a Within the European. ean richeI press fo
We published the first comprehensive White Paperpollution control on the UK model.
on the Environment in l99O. It covered everythingI
43I
Meee eee Enna nennnnnnnr nna
Id, THE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN
TOWARDS THE MILLENNIUM
I: A more prosperous Britain can afford to be ambitious. We can aspire to excellence in the arts, fbroadcasting and sport. We can use our increased leisure time, energy and money, to improve life for miourselves and our families. The National Lottery we propose to introduce can be used to restore our heritage and promote projects which will become a source of national pride.
National Lotteries have been found useful at severalI times in our history. The British Museum wasThe Millennium Fund could be used, for founded out of the proceeds of such a lottery. example:
Fourteen years ago, a Royal Commission recommended the creation of a National Lottery ina To restore the fabric of our nation: our; Britain to provide extra money for deserving causes. great inheritance of buildings which
@The case has become even stronger as British peoplesymbolise and enrich our national life.
gain more opportunities to participate in foreign..
lotteries - thus increasing the risk that funds whichad To help endow our cities and regions we could put to good use in Britain will be divertedwith facilities to enhance the celebration i: abroad. of United Kingdom 2OOO, such as the aeWe believe a well-run, carefully controlled form ofweed tc host the 2OOO Glennie would asnational lottery would be popular, while raising aemoney for many good causes. w To help another major city - chosen by upWe will canvass views on how such a lottery shouldrade fair de ~ to hold be. international rbe run and controlled, and how it would fit within theBa c h ik esigne fo the § vonty fite pattern of charitable fund-raising in Britain. century. innovation for the twenty-hrst
We believe that the funds generated by a National
Lottery should be used to enhance the life of ourTo enable voluntary groups and local nation. People who enjoy the arts, sport, Britain’scommunities to bid for funding for their heritage and fine countryside could all benefit fromown Millennium projects for local the proceeds from a National Lottery. Charities, rightrestoration schemes, or for improving across the country and covering such areas asthe amenities of canals and rivers, as a i CO)medical research, will also be potential beneficiaries. source of enjoyment for local people and a habitat for wildlife.
Ivc &w To provide Millennium bursaries for:4 THE MILLENNIUM FUNDyoung people (and newly retired people); We will be consulting widely on the best way tooffering their chee Seen ad. distribute the proceeds of a lottery. But we haveshenee the £ ° f the Uni tad fo: decided that part of the proceeds should be putby the ear 3OOO. ¢ United Kingdom aside, year by year, into a Millennium Fundyear eww specifically dedicated to projects which will commemorate the start of the twenty-first century and will be enjoyed by future generations.
a We therefore propose to introduce aNational Lottery from l994, which wouldLa help provide funds for a number of goodDa THE ARTS causes in the artistic, sporting, heritageaoroe..
and charitable fields - and from whichBritain has a great artistic heritage and a lively some funds would be put aside for amporary ich. dth opera, dance and arts festivals.
44TOWARDS THE MILLENNIUM. ee
I. III
We have supported this by increasing the public I We want to restore the good image of football. Tough funding of the arts, by 6O per cent in real terms since _ action has cut down football hooliganism. We have l979, and introducing new incentives to personal _ helped to establish the Football Trust, which now giving. The arts have also forged new partnerships devotes £2O million a year to improving the safety of with local authorities, businesses and pategrounds. I. Business sponsorship ‘in particular has...
Pepande dhaeelyPopm PpUnder the National Curriculum all primary andI ary age pup: ollow a course of PE. All
We have set up new Regional (Ans Boards andpupils will be taught to swim by the age of ll.
supported the Scottish ansh Arts Councils in...
order to diversify and enrich cultural life throughoutwponerthp of son. We will encourage rove 5 the country. effective use of local sport and leisure facilities ~
We have financed the European Arts Festival to bethrough compulsory competitive tendering. We want held throughout Britain during our Presidency ofthe to see more dual use of school playing fields and halls
Community in the second half of this year, as wellas and will give schools more freedom in their the first National Music Day in June. management.. I
In this year’s Budget, we announced further taxrelief I We are asking Local Education Authorities not to on film-making in this country. Our aim is to make --_ make sales of school playing fields in future unlessI the performing arts, museums and our heritage _ there is no evidence of long-term need. I accessible to all. We will encourage the young to.. I become involved and will facilitate access for them Sport, too, will benefit from theI: resources generated by the NationalI
The National Lottery will providvoresaedI
@ The National Lottery wil provide a newa We will actively support Britain’s bid to source of finance for the arts. host the 2OOO Olympic Games -in m We will maintain support for the arts andManchester. We will provide £55 million continue to develop schemes for greatertowards the preparation of the site and sponsorship in cooperation withkey facilities in the first stage of the bid,- business and private individuals. and we will ensure that the project, OC w We will reexamine the role of the Artswhether successful or not, contributes
Council, as many of its functions areM the effective regeneration of East now carried out regionally. an “a...:: osWeset up a new Business a We will continue our support of libraries.. Pret as educational, cultural and communitySpo neorship for Sport scheme. This is centres, and urge local authorities toexpeto wet lo - d on ch its tirst keep up standards. We will complete theyear to support local and’ youth sport. I new British Library building for which we have provided £45O million. Ce ff OUR HERITAGEI
CkPublic interest and involvement in Britain’s heritage
Pa SPORThas never been greater. We have created in the past decade English Heritage and the National Heritage
Success in sport is a source of national pride. Memorial Fund to give greater focus and drive to the
Enjoyment of sport can enrich every life. We have © Government’s policies. The National Trust and given strong support to the Sports Council and its _ private owners take a leading part in preserving ourI efforts to raise participation in sport. We actively almost unrivalled heritage. Government will work in support Manchester’s bid to bring the Olympic _ partnership to secure our heritage for the benefit of
Games to Britain. future generations. I
45I aifTHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN
Our cathedrals are among our national glories. Weonly to new telecommunication services, but also to
I: therefore launched the Cathedral Repair Grant the spread of emerging technologies such as high
Scheme in April l99l, providing £ll.5 million over _ definition television.
three years.. nmbh:: Mettt
We have increased, to £l2 million, the grant to, theBroadcasting Standards Council whi work of the
Nae:,€ set up
NHMF for the purchase of historic properties, under the l99O Act. All television and radio objects and collections. The Government alsocompanies accept the need to maintain standards of provides help to private owners through English taste and decency in their treatment of sex and
Heritage repair grants, and tax relief in return for violence and their use of bad language commitments on upkeep and public access.,
We want to preserve the special character of our oldThe European Community regulates standards in. C). town and city centres. We will encourage councils toSeat "We on Casts rhe fae from each Member
~ensure that new developments are in character witheC © ‘lof one of the first countries to ratify a the past; to maintain buildings of importance to themule: e all o Europe convention applying similar character of towns and cities; to limit unnecessary B €s de a its Mem t States. We also, in the
{street furniture and signs; and to plant trees androadcasting ae rought in sanctions against the a, rs an.
iequipment suppliers to support such programmes.. m The National Lottery will also provide. Ppeprog ifunds for the preservation of ourIndependent television producers are benefiting, heritage. from the requirement put on the BBC and ITV to tiancial assistance for the protectiongreat opportunities for independent producers to sell
Iand preservation of the heritage. their programmes to new television channels and iw Together with the heritage agencies, weinternational markets, and there is much greater
Iwill work to make heritage siteschoice for viewers as a result.
issible to the public.
aeceseue roumepueIn l996, the BBC’s Charter comes up for renewal.
OThis will be considered against the background of the a.. much more varied and competitive broadcasting: f BROADCASTINGSnportant tet there chou be a wide public debete im at there sho a wide public debate
We are proud of our record of extending choice, _ about the future direction the BBC should take.
encouraging new producers and maintaining high standards in broadcasting. We opened the way to the settingup of Channel 4, independent radio, satellite television and multi-channel cable TV networks. a We will back the work of the
The l99O Broadcasting Act means that three newBroadcasting Standards Council and independent radio services and a fifth televisionremain vigilant about ensuring high channel will be set up during the next Parliament. standards in satellite broadcasts from
Over two million homes already receive satellite TV. abroad.
We have now licensed well over a hundred cable TV« We will publish a discussion paper on networks and this new industry expects to investthe future of the BBC recognising its
£3, OOO million over the next five years. In comingspecial responsibilities for providing years, British viewers will have an increasing choicepublic service broadcasting.
of channels and programmes. The new and; sophisticated cable networks will open the way not
46I aITHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN
A UNITED KINGDOM!
The United Kingdom is far greater than the sum of its parts. Over many centuries its nations haveI worked, and frequently fought, side by side. Together, we have made a unique mark on history.:
Together, we hold a special place in international affairs. To break up the Union now would diminishI our influence for good in the world, just at the time when it is most needed. I
Nationalist plans for independence are a recipe for weakness and isolation. Higher taxes and politicalI uncertainty would deter investment and destroy jobs. The costly Labour and Liberal devolutionI proposals for Scotland and Wales have the same drawbacks. They do not intend to bring aboutI separation, but run that risk. They could feed, but not resolve, grievances that arise in different partsI of Britain. They would deprive Scotland and Wales of their rightful seats in the United Kingdom CO)I
Cabinet, seats the Conservatives are determined to preserve. We believe strongly that we should goI on working together in full partnership in a Union that has served every part of the United KingdomI
The plans for devolution put forward by the other parties would have a gtave impact not just onI
Scotland and Wales, but also on England. They propose new and costly regional assemblies in
England, for which there is no demand. We will oppose all such unnecessary layers of government.,
The Union has brought us strength both economically and politically. Yet it has preserved the historic and cultural diversity of our islands. Our constitution is flexible, fair and tolerant. It has made thisI country one of the best places in which to live, work and bring up our children. These benefits cannot be tossed away lightly, We will fight to preserve the Union, a promise which only the ConservativesI. can give at this election. I
Da SCOTLAND. A separate Manifesto for Scotland sets out our record in detail and our proposals for building onI
Scotland has achieved an economic and culturalthese achievements. In this document, therefore, we regeneration over the past l3 years. The Scottish _list only a selection.
economy has responded vigorously to the policies we have introduced to liberate enterprise, and many more people are now saving, investing and owning - poe secs ae sequey ettnpprgnmae eit ay cee eee egI their homes. The public services are better fundedERSeee oie and more efficient. There has been a flowering of, @ Business: in Scotland has received ‘a <
Scottish culture.+. boost from our.. creation of Scottish'*:
Scotland enjoys a rich and distinct tradition andherEnterprise sad the Hocal; En SerieEe
Own institutions, which we have preserved andmpanies, we J ave formpep ae strengthened. Scotland has its own framework for}See, as Locate in Sdoes for?
the encouragement of enterprise, investment and ieet Teecatein cotland busi aeI training; its own education system which continuesfs whe d en eomad. the’,; I to excel, with more pupils leaving school better, we of b completein:
qualified and more going on to further and higherS sad with thin the of theI education; its own health budgets which deliver highcotland with those in the restce.; standards of care; and its own glorious inheritanceofcountry.:
buildings and countryside. Le. iI
47II iTHE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAIN ia ne Emon dma eee ee °
I*Thsve b‘es andlafLand made derelict by old industries has been
I_ @ ine massive bureaucracies and layers oreclaimed on a massive scale. The Cardiff Bay local government have few supporters indevelopment and the Ebbw Vale Garden Festival are
Scotland. We will sovide the ps localoutstanding examples, together with the Programme. authorities to provide the value forfor the Valleys.
money and the quality of services that;:. the reform of the current burdensomeon roads in Wales. Spending on health has increased, system of local government byby 6O per cent in real terms since l979. We have introducing single tier councilsspent more than £5 million on our radical Waiting throughout Scotland. Times Initiative, leading to the treatment of 35, OOO extra patients. In school we are spending nearly half;. y m We will continue to strengthenas much again, in real terms per pupil, as in l979.
C): Scotland’s education system for theAnd there has been an enormous expansion in the benefit of parents, pupils and teachers. training budget.
We will respond to the proposals of the
2Howie Coramittee to ctcuee that upperMore Welsh homes - 72 percent - are owned by those. secondary education matches the best inwho live in them than in the United Kingdom as a
Europe. We will continue to increase thewhole. Since the ‘Right to Buy’ was introduced in number of places in higher and furtherl98O, we have enabled almost 9O, OOO council and education and will complete our reformshousing association tenants to buy their own homes.
J; of the system. A separate Manifesto, in both English and Welsh,;: We will extend our reforms to improvesch; out our fal Wake for building on these
‘ NHS patient care in Scotland. Scotlandachievements for Wales.: has led the way in setting limits to-: waiting-times for operations and willmw We will set up a Welsh Economic now be reducing these further. Council to bring together the various:.. bodies with interests in inward
- & Ne are oe Heritag. body, Scottisl. investment, tourism and small business: tural., responsibility for conserving the naturalto advise the Secretary of State.
©environment. We will go further, anda We aim to remove all significant will create a Scottish Environmentaldereliction from Wales by the end of the
Protection Agency to bring togethernew Parliament. i
Powers 4 bathin, the quality of our air, a We will promote the work of the; rivers and bathing waters. Countryside Council for Wales, in order to protect the countryside and those who earn their livelihood there. _.
a We will give further resources to our _
Rural Initiative. And we will continue to ePsupport hill farmers through the Hill - a WALESLivestock Compensatory Allowances.. We will continue to invest heavily in road
Since l979, the economy of Wales has changedan:.
spectacularly. With only 5 per cent of the UnitedSen, rey Brides including the I second -
Kingdom’s population, Wales has consistentlySouth. Vy, alee and the ASS in North enjoyed 2O per cent of its inward investment. NewW. al industries have sprung up. Self-employment hascs.
risen by two-thirds. Welsh manufacturing now hasuw We will continue with our record the highest productivity of any part in the Unitedhospital building programme.
Kingdom.
nnnAUNITED KINGDOMI. iII
I.. new jobs - by contrast with Labour, whose plan for a a We will continue to offer generousnational minimum wage would hit the Province funding for Housing for Wales andparticularly hard concentrate our efforts on the specialya’ needs of rural Wales. All major publicly. In the new Parliament we will continue to seek to refunded housing developments will makeestablish stable institutions of Government inI adequate provision for the less well off. Northern Ireland, so that powers currently exercisedI satey Ministers in the Northern Ireland Office can beI s Wewill introduce a new Welsh Languagereturned to locally-elected politicians. IIa We will publish a White Paper on local.. Sey eee; government reform this autumn with aa We will always give the security forcesO)I view to establishing unitary authorities, hawbacking within the rule 2 f the~I based on the historic counties andw, and - against Labour opposition - county boroughs. We will ensure a fullthey that they have the special powers role for Community Councils underey need fron __ protect _ the whole these arrangements. community irom violence. nage.
a we wil complete the privatisation of ~ porthernand Electricity, ‘transfer °
X F NORTHERN IRELANDthe water and ‘sewage ‘services to theI
4private sector, and:-examine ways of -I
We have upheld our pledge that Northern Irelandbringing private sector skills into the will remain an integral part of the United Kingdommanagement ‘of. Northern Ireland in accordance with the democratically expressedRailways, heeI wishes of the majority of the people who live there. Il continue: to ‘pursue ‘policies
It is a pledge that only the Conservative and Unionist. desigued to: tevtate; cocial n Policies ~I
4... E9.' 'widen the sense of common purpose
Our overriding objective in Northern Ireland is towhich is growing in the Province./ eliminate the evil of terrorism. This requires progressm We will build on the close security coCO)I in four areas: security, economic, social and political. operation that has been establishe Death
The security forces in Northern Ireland performthe Republic of Ireland under the AngloI their duties with courage and professionalism. TheyIrish ‘Agreement. I are entitled to expect all the necessaryie encouragement, and legal and material support froma We will continue to work strenuously for the Government. Under the Conservatives, thea political agreement which isI strength of the RUC has been increased, while theacceptable to all the parties involved in
Emergency Provisions Act l99l contains newthe talks which the Secretary of State has powers to combat terrorist funding. had during the past year with the mainI
Northern Ireland is sharing in the economicSolend and he arties in North theI transformation of the United Kingdom as a result ofRepublic of Ireland. They have providedI
Conservative policies. Belfast is attracting significanta firm basis for political progress in new private investment. Harland and Wolff andUlster, and for building newI
Shorts have been successfully privatised. Major workrelationships both between Northera is also under way to regenerate Londonderry andIreland and the Republic, and in theseI many of Ulster's smaller towns. We will continue toislands as a whole. I pursue policies to encourage enterprise and bring
I49I aa htt CC AR A i. THE BEST FUTURE FOR BRITAINI. YOUR CHOICE AT THIS ELECTIONI: This Election is about the future. Your future. Britain's future. Our future role in the world. This isI ia time to go forward with conviction and confidence, not to go back to the failure and bitterI controversies of the past. I
IIt is difficult to remember the Britain we were _ Britain. They would turn the clock back to policies elected to transform in l979. The country we did that impoverished and divided our country.
transform. Socialism here and abroad is the regret of yesterdayI
It was a depressed and divided country, accustomednot the hope of tomorrow. vI to failure and suspicious of change. oO. During the succeeding Parliaments, we have curbedI inflation, reformed trade union law, encouraged aenterprise, cut taxes, modernised our educationand WI
7training, improved the management of our health ” ONLY THE BEST FOR BRITAINI fj: service, given more help to the needy, extended;; I aownership, helped through our vigilance toend the We believe that only the best is good enough for
7Cold War, widened our influence in Europe, and Britain, and that the best will only be accomplishedI atearned the respect of the world. if we give the British people the freedom and the.
fopportunity they need to succeed. I
‘hA decade of success ‘ended with the problems ofI
Irecession - a world recession. We know how tough it We have a new leader, proven in office, and a new; has been for many but we are poised to move forwardagenda - yet a tried set of principles. Those principlesI again, lacking only the spark of confidence with reflect our conviction that Britain has done bestI, which a Conservative victory would ignite recovery. when the people of Britain have been given the personal incentive to succeed. National success has not been primarily the result of accidents of: geography, landscape and natural resources. Nor hasI eBit been the result of government action and stat) tDg THE CHALLENGE AHEADcontrol. Success has been won when we have given
“. our people their head: when their natural skills, I
The challenges of the l99Os demand ¢ responsibletalents, energy, thrift and inventiveness have beenI an ve of hee boveneruse fth en un sedis s ayreleased, not suppressed. That was true when thisI nature of the achievements of the l98Os and is readycentury began; it is still true as this century draws to to build successfully on them. A governmentits closeI committed to the principles of choice, ownership,,3 responsibility and opportunity; committed to low -_ Britain should approach the Millennium with headI inflation and low taxes; committed to better qualityand spirits high, with a strong economy, with a highI and value in our public services; committed to strong -_ standard of living, with generously endowed and wellI defences. Labour cannot provide that leadership. managed public services, and with secure defences.
IThey lack experience, principle and vision. We want Britain to be an example to the world of
IWith Socialism everywhere in rout or retreat, it is how 4 free people can make the very best of their
Iunclear what the Labour Party stands for. For publicdestiny. That prospect is within the grasp of us all.
consumption, Labour leaders purport to have We must now make it happen.; I jettisoned the principles of a life-time. But howThe prize ithe hope inviing. the dre much can they be trusted? How genuine is thesinable am ¢ ithe Se eet h d amI conversion and what do they actually believe? attainable. We want, with you, to make tea
I. reality. A Conservative Government will help you toI
IIt is clear only that Labour would threaten our achieve the very best. The very best future for achievements, undo our reforms and hamstringBritain. I
I5OI
ITeee