y fr Conservatives snge eh oe fe. iFSF»\ FP é4ajtnBiegsn OSM see sareoe Aa as g Peoe ad Ol Scone la TU aTS Oe olea
ETE Leeder eel Le EE ty esd ek feat ue rat stonAE en a Ire ee weeny prone me are M Neamt GaAs Mosier aM WB presse oe? A A Ao gtee im ee9B Bh oar If grptaceraTM Spent EanLi
Pe a arg RETST ecg ties!“uk ig fal aon eg gnaecM Ri eye ge gee Batog trai gtectas eta iPT sal ates at Bus ear Ocera ee mt 4 ” l a 2 I J! J re L ee rieI i sai Tsa 5 cs Fi “H ar oodlesesI
Sa cecil d Pee ee Darah Hi paeeae piel arin PA dee OR ON Tran ot obeeee nea mieae i eirel Peasuraete aT het Pea aye i l fe ee a Og are eo Th "l ry lIi or: - “ ie Fs a A aoe al, e ra I me ey eee I L ke msriaral
NMI Bet gt mated Deeg ccaato ae" g ae aian atl eaM oe etary Gael Da ome MSPs Oe aa a. a aS BE II. pmo see gD bias ieee Sect pe Pes et -lIa I ea Le aSa es 2 I Peres4Poe fe] - 7: izl [renal ae 4 arta al Fa ct i Waka tat l ee Iae ete ae iPr aalthrou g h our lives eter Ah etre Meola cubaVW pats noesayraising a family6
We present here the most ambitious ConservativeIt shouldn't be necessary to make an appeal to commonArd i I nr poe F I “t L is Led I FiFESLre rt par k be iii ry] ri; I.,. ae ene come ol Ui eeadWroe Os Ball Bas mtr Pea ba(aIeae ge eee ey seTi_.
programme for a generation. sense. Yet the common sense wisdom of the mainstreami wie ret art Str rate iBooLei i ey ae i rag a: omliving safelylO fonIiAiPa ee aeen eacad tet precanola"eiHeas gra pel Wn Sa, Da ooo a weaner".
Its aim is to release the wisdom, decency and enterprisemajority CAGE CHEM EES, Cio (elu Crea ENE, re ei ne Dee fer lado. ootl-pant earicer ae,.
of British citizens. We can achieve that by handing backBUNGE HIEMES IRENEMet tj an Cea a AT H ens I Pain, in l ris aH iy tti. Tis Hiiearning a livingl4 eae Renae teagan Mar Maman oO Bathe Grorie Mer UO focenai ansfeee He ae fe aay I Helmet oe Oto to individuals and families the ability to shape their ownLabour does not understand our country and cannot valuea 5 i is Po “IIi I the sell - a ii! ee Pid a [* mel Hm ale I a AI etre aad Dat oriataPatiestaBeccecvatat O. O a 5 L"ieorot ae eae I. i lives and communities. what it cannot understand. a! cr al iret i eft J riroiTiintr il Nese ais os ie I eeIstaying healthyl8
Pe “iamaeta I ee leI
Fe aoe A Eke. 4*. ll oho go Se Sa f,.
We will free entrepreneurs to build businesses andThis meddling and interfering Government is eroding ouri H rs Le. iIr ite': eee# -J eT cone In I ae. 4 Feta lgrowing older22 to create prosperity, free those who use public services tofreedoms as well as weakening the institutions that givei i - coe peolesaeaPes Eeeons 2 I I pa I pond Ft or 7. I choose what is best for them and free those who work inus a sense of common purpose. laaaLf5 & pereF l in l! 3tae ts a OrtaJ ii iLrl te Anlria nite Se tan a alas
Gur sence eins hneeiels Elid ells Santis telaAt this Election Britain has a choice between a Labour Party5: bree Fie. rLelrH niei reid reo et set a_isk. h endless political interference.. Ilee7a”"IanIma i an ill Te I I CeIn owing who we are that trusts government instead of people and aLsza ee’Ies' ial MN aA ee, olr
IF et atsafiea“aat " Ae ea
We want to set people free so that they have greaterConservative Party that trusts people instead ofIte relI"aa ja aaLLa er i i. F i] foe oe ee;.;: tTFa: I“4ia-Torre. a world leader28 power over their own lives. That is what I have alwaysgovernment.7 LeuJ _? aal " et alre a iy fi Tw re it L r believed.“Fad eee4rs'ee -,{jcc oers l bea bit.
I trust the British people. Itre*47Thao 2 eea stronger society32
But there is something else too. I value those aspects. E. allogee ee ge Bol L. hs b
I trust their common sense. Se7‘Peod”een gles Bel on of our national life which are bigger than individuals andiles E I“i pee cerzlF ee eon wal iEtown and country36 families. That is why we will nurture our towns and cities, _'*S time for common sense./iDecor Poss De " "foal Boats oop peasTaeaorc a ret pe are top ee ee ag Seas te aanit, 4ons our countryside, our local institutions, our charities, our."Nae I Eee oT ee eee Teaaoe) Sy4a civilised country4O democracy - for they make us who we are as a nation. I}é #ra + l ie vias soe aS tl £ pote a laaAe ikI
“naes Boe OL Reena Ol amare eeepeer oa: OD eee
Our programme is rooted in the instincts of millions of7Lore, or Fi - ‘ l 4 Ld me A weneuhi Ay i 4 rs lI+h i! af oes Hea proud democracy44 people whose beliefs are mocked by Labour It is rooted,. lOe ee, Soe fare k 2a he si4ae” i Ay ae i poy ong a aren, ee 7lfe F.
in other words, in common sense. UNY‘iee oebs Foret ] nf\Byoentya ee a oe. aPao
IrhsIrial:
Pe, eeie AT
ALieesFew ". Ji 5 LtZ"- ee eae i rs i” ee a eae'a7c eee reaa 4 l moe le et aeoeiL l. pea, teeL
Ll. peel. Iee:: ee a a aycliPs i ia AE"ait a i; i tiaidPap rt mh om aeemdameat44adeaaaotaPie soci: e: i)Beescas enuess.‘ESaee eeI%ye Pepee IHei7ee sy aeOE age sit a7: a VA‘ SS oo nSemi. wlce, aig.“Iog, eather. I raising a family6 living safelylO earning a livingl4 staying healthyl8 growing older22> iFamilies feel more than ever that they are struggling to bring up their children in an environment that is hostile.“We will introduce a a / S / NnaThey feel it is getting harder to make ends meet, especially when their children are very young. They feel the Government onlynew Married Coup le’s ijvalues childcare if someone else is paid to provide it, and that it doesn't value marriage at all. They feel that they are paying a
Ifortune in tax, but they aren't getting the education they want for their childrenAllowance which will give?'They also worry that, however hard they try to bring up their children well, the dangers of being drawn into crime and drug i; a tax cut worth £l, OOO iuse are growing. And they fear that passing our values on from one generation to the next is harder than ever. J
~~ 5
/oweIt's time for common sense. ie) many families when
Common sense means strengthening the familSeConservatives will help families bringing up children. We will let families keep more of what they earn. We will support”
-they need help most
4marriage. We will provide choice and high standards in schools. And we will help parents who feel they aren't getting enoughyp.
help at the time they need it the most.
¢ Less tax for familiesE&
<a“ay
¢ Support for marriageT i+4Hi 4 treeCutting tax for families
¢ Freedom for headteachers and governors to run their own schools4re hi # tiieThe task of bringing up children is made much harderWe will cut taxes on families with children under 5 bythey need help most. If someone is not using all or. aTl. F
Power for parents to change management of failing schools; iPewhen families keep less of what they earn, because theincreasing the Children’s Tax Credit by £2OO a year. Thispart of their personal tax allowance they will be able to
¢ Endowed universities and less onerous student loan repaymentsJ,45aaaty 7Government is taking more. means an extra £4 a week will be taken off the tax bill oftransfer it to a working spouse if they have children
#a:;_most families with young children, in addition to what theyunder ll or receive Invalid Care Allowance in respect
PsifeSLabour have increased taxes on hardworking families. After; iFF;;: receive in Child Benefit. of a relative.
ff‘ddafour years of Labour, a typical family was paying £67O more rytax per year than when the Government took office. The arrival of children often puts a family under particularMothers or fathers who stop working to care for children pressure. One parent may give up work for a while, reducingcan sometimes find it difficult to get back into paid
%Despite all the evidence that marriage provides the best. II.: I;; the couple’s income just when their expenses are greatest. work afterwards. This is where our Family Scholarships environment for bringing up children, married couples do;; scheme will help. Parents who have taken time out not fit into Labour's politically correct agenda. That is whyA Conservative government will support families coping.; ao,; i, from their careers in order to care for their children will
“athey h: lised millif families by abolishing thwith these pressures.
iey ave penalised millons oF ramiles by abolsning meibe able to apply for a scholarship to help them undertake. Married Couple's Tax Allowance. We will introduce a new Married Couple’s Allowance which -_yocational or professional training.
éConservatives will give families a break. will give a tax cut worth £l, OOO to many families when through our lives;_e; cannaok. Widows and widowers find supporting children particularlyHeadteachers and their staff cannot command respect inWe plan to spend what the Government has planned. But with usConservatives will give parents the right to call for a specialFreeing our universitiesF Fa veer aaa iF difficult. Conservatives will give extra help to all widows andtheir own schools if they are treated as mere branch managersmore of the money will actually get to the schools. We will saveOfsted inspection if they fear that their child’s school is failing. oo.. i PaMe Seuaei:
i;,; Our universities used to be the best in the world. Many ofahi Jees ‘i widowers with dependent children by removing tax on theon the receiving end of instructions from the council or frommoney currently wasted on government and council bureaucracy, If the inspectors confirm their view, the school’s management.;+ra: a... them still have a formidable reputation, but they are underitesssyl
Widowed Mother's Allowance and the new Widowed Parent’sWhitehall. And teachers are leaving the profession in drovesgiving this money directly to schools according to the number ofwill have to be changed. This is our Parent's Guarantee. IodJaaF. threat from interference by politicians and uncertainty overa}
Allowance. This will provide a valuable increase of up tobecause of all the pointless paperwork. pupils. By doing that each school would have received, on average,.; I; ai} a;..;_Reducing barriers for studentstheir funding. Gj
£2O per week in widowed parents’ income. That is why its time for common sense. an extra £54O per pupil in l999/2OOO to spend on its own priorities. a: ifI
“otStudents feel particularly aggrieved because Labour brokeConservatives want our universities to be free toWeee
It is right to boost the incomes of families with modest earnings. Conservatives will introduce ‘Free Schools’. We will free everyBritain has some excellent schools. Often they are next door toByee:_ee.‘BS.. a. a as:.. the promises they made to them at the last election. shape their own character and specialisms, competing withakeiyi
We will reform the Working Families Tax Credit so it is onceschool in the country from bureaucratic control and allow themmediocre ones. Nothing is more frustrating for parents than to bei an... Ithe world’s best for students and research funding. je more paid as a benefit direct to the caring parent. Up toto shape their own charactertold that they cannot send their child to the school of their choiceGood students are put off going to college because they willee
4OO, OOO mothers will gain from this reform. because its numbers are artificially restricted in order to keep upbe burdened by loans that must be repaid even when theirTo achieve their independence they need to haveI
Heads and Governors will have complete responsibility fora. Il numbers at a weaker school. So we will abolish the rule that stopsincome is relatively low. their own resources. We will therefore create permanent“apavee iiirunning their schools. They will be able to choose how to reward~ticah
More choice and higher standards in schoolsgeysuccessful schools from expanding to take more pupils. Moreae;; endowment funds for Britain's universities.
excellence amongst their teachers. And they will be able to use, Some are deterred from taking vital jobs, in teaching or in the
The least parents should expect from all the taxes they pay is aparents will get their first choice of school for their children...
as a criterion for admission, the willingness of a pupil or parenthealth service, because of the cost of their student loans. AFap:
decent school for their children. Lating our best schools expand isnt enough. We want to seeWe will let families keep to subscribe to a home-school agreement which sets out the:: Under Labour, student loans must be repaid as soon as af what thWi
Labour promised much on education, but after fourinribilitiAnew schools springing up. We will allow churches and other faith
°ee powresponsibiliies of students and their school to each otherpennegraduate’s income reaches £lO, OOO per year. With us, HAKONE) CONF Va Atleay BeNiel:© they have failed to deliver. That failure is no accident. It is becausecommunities, groups of parents, charitable foundations andI. I9FF
We will abolish the nonsensical rules that make it difficult forgraduates will not have to pay anything unless and untilwill su fey ee) rt marri age. We will
Labour have tried to run the nation's schools from Whitehall.;.;; companies to set up new schools. They will be entitled to per-pupil.
Heads to exclude disruptive pupils - we will not allow a fewtheir income tops £2O, OOO per year. And we will not99F
Con. F..;; funding in the same way as existing schools, and will be subject toprovide choice and high iservatives will pursue a very different policy. unruly pupils to damage the education of everyone else. introduce topup fees.
the same standards and inspections.9D
Our objective is to give parents choice, and headteachers freedom. -_Instead, we will set up Progress Centres outside the schools. standards in schools. The people who are most likely to realise that a school has
These reforms will lead to schools of the sort parents want -These Centres will make sure disruptive pupils get specialist helpPeey
PreF F va: bl t officials in a distant bi but th schools with high standards, schools which have their own traditions, to overcome their problems so that where possible they mayames a distinct ethos and which wear their school uniform with pride. return to mainstream schools. Paton Gi GulsieMevtnD ceiieelh i)a le7*- ne.. Pian ifFre aaa *: We may have grown more prosperous as a nation, but the quality of our life is still impoverished by crime.“It ’S time to stop turning a
Hf7ti tel bt‘Decent people, who work hard and who obey the law, are outraged that criminals seem free to make their...
PeeeeI Beane jalPetesi; blind eye to crimes committed i3, a Low aives a misery.
aaa. iFsfOy2alesLabour have talked tough on law and order but they have failed to deliver. Police numbers have fallen, and violentby yo ung offenders and ensure
Ss aQafaatatacrime is on the rise..: BaeeeFelinstead that they are put back heos eaepeterenesIIIt's time for common sense.
> ae. een the right track.” eee, ro Ta“peeConservatives will trust the instincts of the mainstream majority on law and order. That means more police(e)egack.
Common sense means having enoughr iheaand less bureaucracy holding them back. It also means tougher sentences for some crimes and more honest. I.74 iesola baalsentencing for all crimes.
police to keep our streets safe and a criminali + a '-dhicde..“ee ©aTe justice system that reflects our values rather~-; iA than undermines themcee- bh,. al mar qeaa-}More police, tougher sentencesSo we will implement our ‘cops in shops’ initiative - getting
\-a ilaperwork done in visible places on the beat and not. A:;: Conservatives will increase the number of police officersspE
+ Increase police numberses i ISe ee; ooback in the station. And we will encourage parish and ee oaion our streets by reversing the cuts in police numbers that-
¢ Free police from bureaucracy so that they can get on with policingl"Labour have made. town councils to create an additional new role, that of the aiatcinaamiat)parish constable.
BOLTS eT CE ME l)We will free the police to get on with policing rather than
-.. Under the Conservatives, the police will be encouraged
¢ Criminals to serve the sentence given by the courttpaperwork. Weighed down by regulations and under i].. to combat loutish behaviour, graffiti, and vandalism which
+ More rights for victimsoyIheavy political attack, police morale has fallen to its lowest gyFI.;. destroy the quality of every day life for millions of people.
4point for many years. We must raise police morale. We ifsHbawill work with police forces to cut out bureaucracy, and toA hard core of persistent young offenders commit aA>) aanesey rygues Unerer ge Idevolve work that doesn't have to be carried out by thedisproportionate number of crimes. They offend again: a oe PL I: Bai bee: police to other bodies. and again, laughing at the law and making their4.,; neighbours’ lives a misery.
People feel safer if they see police officers around.
our lives3Sink Coneoe a tr!. ieee A ee Pe.-- re lOa +aCE otemij;: ll aCeleLy tal 5S. ". Laaa
“é. ee livin 9 safe lyConservatives will increase the number of police officers on t, tere
It's time to stop turning a blind eye to crimes committedConservatives will end the nonsense whereby criminals knowintroduce new laws to protect children from paedophilesour Streets.
by young offenders and ensure instead that they are put backfull well they will serve only a fraction of the prison sentencewho use internet chat rooms.
on the right track. handed down by a judge. oe.
Victims first
We will increase tenfold the number of places in SecureWe will introduce honesty in sentencing so that the sentencei
Too often criminals seem to enjoy more rights than their
Training Centres - taking persistent young menaces off ourhanded down in court is the one served by the criminal. We victims. Conservatives will make sure that the justice system streets for at least 6 months. We will link their release datewill abolish Labour's special early release scheme as well as treats victims fairly.
to the attainment of objectives such as a recognisedautomatic early release and ensure that any discounts from qualification or standard of behaviour. the sentence are transparent, have to be earned and areARELIEE Salles CitsEr wito ts wala) Mn insih CzSe wilI
7netherdantcmatchnonrslberantialbe identified to each victim, and they will have a similarI
Drugs are now blighting even our rural communities,;..
continuous point of contact in the Crown Prosecution ruining lives and causing a wave of other crimes likePrison life should not be a life of idleness. Under the,,,,
Service. Both the police and the CPS will be required toAverage sentences, and average time served on7;.
burglary and mugging. Conservatives will give the police newConservatives, prisoners will be required to perform a propera: a, Labour’ial early relh4999-2OOl: We could all make a list of the additional paperwork that creates a iFikeep the victim informed as the investigation and prosecutionOO EDS,: bureaucratic nightmare for officers who want to spend more time actuall powers to crack down on drug dealers. day's work. The proceeds will contribute to reparations for;,9Pply a.“[RSLS ESS lil) WALLET REESSINS OMT 8D G]MEIN NETSRobbery: average sentence:2 years 2 monthsdelivering the goods... The situation is far more frustrating nowadays
F\hildrentheir victims and to the upkeep of their own families. Andee.',;.;' Most evil of all are the drug dealers who try to lure childrecharges are dropped or reduced. ance (ihm sonest4l monthsthan at any time in my 28 years’ service. The public is getting a raw deal. og: ay: prisoners will learn the habit of working, just as everyone else'::
into addiction. We will give a mandatory prison sentence toA Chief Inspector of Police has to do each day. We will also overhaul the law so that it is on the side of dealers convicted of selling drugs to under-l6s. And, in: oo_ the victim not the criminal. This will include the law on selfInflicting Grievous Bodily Harm: average sentence: l year 7 months sentencing drug-pushers, judges will be allowed to take intoSex offenders who have been released can now only be;-_.
defence and the double jeopardy rule. average time served:8 months account, as an aggravating factor, any dealing done in thesupervised for a maximum of lO years. Courts should be able vicinity of schools. to place sex offenders under supervision for life. We will also..
Assault on a police officer: average sentence:5 months average time served:6 weeksSince l99798 violent crime has risen by l5 per cent.
l2l3:
It is getting harder for people and businesses in Britain to earn a living. O
3Conservative tax cuts
It should be getting easier. The tough decisions and hard choices made by the British people and Conservative
’fGovernments in the l98Os and l99Os transformed our economic prospects, and made Britain’s businesses competitive. a.
-Abolish taxes on savings ip; But instead of advancing further we are slipping back. People who have to watch every penny, see more and more ofand dividends£3 billion ai V i niee-s, i) ae eetheir money taken by the Government. Businesses are spending too much time dealing with new regulations, with tooRaise Personal Allowance for
-a E: aflittle time to focus on their customers. pensioners by £2, OOO£O.8 billion
Hi i. Aal aH4It would be disastrous to reelect a Government whose central economic policy is to increase tax and regulation by stealth. Increase Children’s Tax Credit by
\eckdie}4.£2OO a year for families with children
‘van]Ia: It's time for common sense. oe
Common sense means less tax and(a ii a i. riunder the age of 5£O.3 billion latifId busi"2 ee peeaWe will cut taxes on people and businesses and cut government interference and regulation in order to match‘Abolish taxon W jishtWid d Mother’ regulation tor people an usinessesa, PeTeeition iTWP SCO Tees eU ects gpp'*Miethe competition in the global marketplace. Allowance and Widowed
- be-+iParent’s Allowance£O. l billion.-.._ee iIraIntroduce a new Married7" ¢ Lower taxes for businesses, families, savers, pensioners and motoristsoe: aeooCouple’s Allowance£l billion
I Mice ooa FLower taxesSU
Eeate°
¢ Public spending not to outstrip the growth of the economyae ai ‘_Cut petrol tax by 6p per litre£2.2 billion
_EEAllthld, ts of alll politicalfWe will be a tax-cutting government.__:.
m4conta‘‘. 7FaeaEHF TATE NEAR) eS UNNSINES (l GT Pel [STEINTax relief on Appproved Share Options £O. l billion
¢ No more stealaxes - transparent economic policya;: ee.."DENI SN TIENEach}yeatjasithe economy grows we can spend moreRegeneration Tax Breaks£O.2 billion
* Cut the cost of regulation on business every year\Yet Britain is going in the opposite direction. Labour promisedon vital public services, but also allow people to keep more::_
HiL"iBusiness Rates reductions£O.2 billion. j‘not to raise taxes. They have broken that promise. Expertsof their own money. We will improve the performance of_---.
Keep enelpoundat,“Abolish IR35£O. l billion ve\have catalogued forty-five separate tax increases since l997. government and make policy changes so that after two years-
#naaa7%we will be able to save £8 billion a year compared to Labour's
4Labour have said that, if they were reelected, they would tI. plans. These changes do not affect schools, the NHS, os‘Iincrease spending each year faster than the growth of our '77lice or defence.:
a’olnational income. That inevitably means even higher taxes. BThe tax burden has risen under Labour by
7:\erHigher tturally to Labour bthey don'tWe will return this £8 billion to people in tax cuts - set out3 per cent of GDP from 35.2 per cent in frSsrigher taxes come naturally to Labour, because they don:.
-zé: Le -, throughout this manifesto - targeted to help those who havel996/97 to 38.2 per cent in 2OOO/Ol - that is iige{HS [SETS (O Sher inet oom UNTEINEy,. the equivalent of lOp on the basic rate of laa a5been hit hardest by Labour's tax increases.7
AhnConservatives do trust people to spend their own money, andincome tax.
--Hae. ilitiy: is _we will therefore pursue a very different policy.
our livesPM eee nl7 SEY ee ae
Aoted ide
Recinilginentenmnn: aa earning a livingWe wi cts on peopl or businesses and cut governmentfe interference and regulation in order to
Conservatives understand that our circumstances change throughmeddling with them for their own ends. have the power to send them to Parliament for full debate. And theI our lives - most of us face financial pressures when we have youngWe need simpler taxes, too. Capital Gains Tax, for exampleCommission will calculate, through an independent audit, the cost ofmatch the comp etition in the globalcy',,; a,,,;; Social security - £2.5 biliO) Sti”- children, for example, or find ourselves living on a fixed income inis exactly what a tax ought not to be - at a high rate with lotsgovernment regulations for business. It will then set regulatory budgetsmarketplace. e old age. So we will carefully target tax cuts to help people at timesof complicated exemptions. Capital Gains Tax should befor each government department alongside their financial budgets. We in their lives when they need it most, when they are struggling hardsimpiticd fallowancestremovediand nelatetcutslinetexperencewill bring these regulatory budgets down, year after year. The burden ofDept of Environment, Transport & The Regions - £l billion Hamm with difficult responsibilities. of the US and Ireland is that this stimulates enterprise andregulation has ratcheted up for far too long. We will reverse it.
This is not the end of our tax cutting ambitions. With proper controltax revenues rise. Small businesses will be exempt from some regulations altogether. Dept of Trade & Industry - £O.3 billion
G/ CRanmEnR eral INS seo LE Gti Mee ren ENAConservatives will repeal the tax on IT consultants, the notoriousBritain has been ahead of the field in the information economy vomit4iReversing the growth in government bureaucracy - £l.8 billion mm we can cut taxes further. Among our priorities will be to raise theIR35, which has driven away from Britain some of our most productiveDecateetetrentecenicavrenmentcnloniearcetencliont iii. aaFive disciplines for a sound econom
Inheritance Tax threshold and to raise the threshold at whichworkers. We will replace it with targeted anti-avoidance measures. FecuatonmLctnonmmecrelcsneinatcdvantcetiacmvetiontIPly people begin to pay higher rate income tax, because it currentlyLlatineed more regulations, we need more competition. The utilityBritain Works - £O.6 billion EEEThe next Conservative Government will operate within a sound and stable financial framework based on five disciplines.
catches people who are not, by any definition, rich. Css Igawalattftitidaddthket
Reauiltiem isinlathealnahUse Pl ie MelesS al Pi stele PtelalCe sluts iMTelaM ed leltsleceltt aT EE TAG: We will keep the pound. Labour's plan for early entryWe will appoint a National Accounts Commission to
‘egulation is the new way Labour politicians control the economya idominance of incumbents which stand in the way of competition.
Clearer and simpler taxesbusithlant+ nationalising, thlatyp'Creation of a Community Legal Aid Fund - £O.3 billion: into the euro is the single biggest threat to ourdraw up proper national accounts, including a proper usinesses they wouldnt dream oF nationallsing, ney regulate. economic stability. By keeping the pound we will keeppresentation of the Government's long term liabilities.
Labour have tried to disguise their tax increases by introducing newWe will abolish Labour's Climate Change Levy package. The._. os
It has the same consequences: the judgment of politicians and.. Sanita Gi Cur Esomanms wales melueling ine etailiey isWe will plot a course away from the direction in which stealth taxes and making the tax system more complex. We wantnecessary carbon dioxide reduction can be achieved far moreset interest rates to suit British economic conditions.,:
civil servants is substituted for that of owners and entrepreneurs.,;, the Chancellor is leading us, and towards real annual people to be able to see how much they pay in tax, and to see itefficiently by other means. We will also review the future of nuclearEndowing Universities - £l.3 billion [7We will enhance the independence of the Bank ofincreases in spending which are within the trend rate come down. We will run the economy with discipline, and disciplineSo a Conservative Government will cut the burden of regulationenergy and its role in contributing to reductions in CO, emissions. England's Monetary Policy Committee. of growth of the economy, requires transparency. So we will send every taxpayer a clearGENES EUSIESESS (D SENG ET CASTES ELNET HEN SENNWe will set up a Council of Economic Advisers, which i. Endowing Britain’s culture - £O.2 billion 2AA statement of how the Government raises money and then spends it. iheigregulators: Govetnme nts ate lheld)\toIaocouniiog ihe taxpayers)will comment publicly on whether the balance between money they spend. We think they should be similarly held responsiblespending and taxes represents a prudent approach to
We will create a National Accounts Commission to set standardsfor the other costs they impose on businesses, All new regulations wilthe national finances, and is helping secure low inflation of transparency for the public accounts and stop politicians fromTotal - £8 billion EEEand low interest rates.
have to be scrutinised by a new Deregulation Commission, which will l7c: et4 a nie_ aac FUE_ "ergot. The National Health Service is in a state of almost permanent crisis.“ Th e C onse rvat ive
Say / N gToo many of us experience a second-class system. People are waiting too long to be treated; they are suffering shabby and
‘Junhygenic conditions in hospitals; they have no choice in how, when or where they are looked after As people become used top a rty i s comm I tte d to; par. choice and quality in other areas of their life, the service they get from the NHS is increasingly unacceptable.
e ayae ais not ust about money. a comprehensive NHS eeeAsk anyone who works in the health service and they will tell you that the NHS is now creaking under the strain of bureaucracy. ym and Government gimmicks. All the Government has done in four years is to substitute its own political priorities and the pursuit offri ee to al I I ts users.
4a4:, headlines for the clinical judgment of doctors and nurses. Labour said they would cut waiting lists - so hospitals have been forced
Common sense means ending political interference9SINS Ne OEE ThecersSen aaeweight to bring in waiting lists to get on the waiting list, and to give priority to non-urgent operations over those in genuine medical need.
in medical judgments and ele choice to patientsIt's time for common sense. The next Conservative Government will match the Government's plans for spending on the NHS but
“! aensure the money goes further.
L'4rLbai.: We will take politicians out of the dayto-day management of the NHS, putting in their place respect for clinical decisions and
* Increase funding for NHSiy*iaccountability to patients.
hes: at
¢ Trust doctors and nurses, not politicians, to make medical decisionsi liWe will also build a new partnership between the state and independent sectors.
i. a&' ¢ Give patients and GPs the right to choose in which hospital to be treatedi
¢ Remove tax penalty on private medical insurancege, aaa beeient’
¢ Guaranteed limits on waiting times for patientsi -+ ey, a, -sUli 58S (EVETETLES
-'~TMThe NHS cannot succeed if those who work within itYet, immediately on taking office, Labour introducedWy) i,“are not allowed to succeed. Our National Health Servicetheir Waiting List Initiative which replaced clinical judgmenty, f used to be an example to the world. We still have firstwith bogus political priorities.
class doctors and nurses, and many of our hospitalsImmediately on our taking office we will abolish the have international reputations for excellence. TheWaiting List initiative. We will introduce a Patient's clinical judgment of professionals in the NHS is stillenarantectineteddh among the best anywhere.
lives l8l9tayl health
The Patient's Guarantee will give patients a maximum waitingWe will require hospitals to give back authority to WardWe will allow alternative and complementary therapies to beThe Conservative Party is committed to a comprehensiveIt doesn't take a doctor to take a patient's blood pressure.
time in defined clinical areas, starting with cardiac andSisters, so that they can make sure that their patients getmade available through the NHS, provided they are of provenNHS free to all its users. There is no question of anyoneWe will encourage an expansion in the role of practice. Z cancer services, based on their medical need as assessedthe care they demand. And we want to bring back Matronclinical effectiveness. being forced to take out private insurance. But if people donurses to take on some of the tasks carried out by GPs, by the patient's own consultant. The health authority will beiiiiiiiiHes yPptyso that someone is responsible for overseeing andWe willie Castors tio aifittta clesitile lneun they ongentisechoose to insure themselves privately they should not beallowing them more time to see more patients..
obliged either to treat the patient within that maximum waitiniiiiii.5 eae gF&SUpstaltelng) ito HMMs) Stikthemselves to deliver the best care to their patients. PEWelI Se) (eI ENiG) iS CreleeSome health authorities allow doctors to prescribeeet time, or to arrange for the patient to have the choice of beingLabour itaity, ho offer theietddd LCti‘s ee a ii: Fjour imposes a tax penalty on employers who offer theircertain new drugs, and some do not. Conservativesl treated in another health authority or in a private hospital. TELE S ST SLMS lita! [REL TEGPs have told us that they don't want a new upheaval inoar aemployees private medical insurance, and then taxes againwill end this lottery whereby the postcode you live in+
We will stliticians interfering in clinical decisiOne of the best ways of improving the performance of theprimary care: we will follow their advice. Instead, we will give:'-Pa le will stop politicians interfering in clinical decisions.. any employee who has this benefit. It doesn’t make sensedetermines the treatment you receive by introducing anF..; NHS is to give patients choice. GPs the choice of whether to operate as Primary Care Trusts if and in the running of hospitals.._aand, when affordable, we will abolish both taxes. Exceptional Medicines Fund. Expensive new medicines -‘j
*eqnllsbEee) NalNCES GedFthey think that is right for themselves and their patients. And;
Ffen Labour were elected they limite's’ freedom to referBeta Interfiis - wireall
The role of the Secretary of State will be to agree funding, we will encourage GPs to specialise, so that GP teams will beMore patients treated, more quicklysuch as Beta Interferon for multiple sclerosis - will beed th and to regulate standards of quality, not to micro-managepatients to the hospital of their choice..,... funded direct to doctors from a budget set by the Secretaryoe oe I, increasingly able to offer expert diagnosis and treatment to theirGeFTDuniites®a tre teilres (yet etera4
FFFa... inservatives will unblock the bottlenecks that slow downfjfteria laiLE_ hospitals. We will create a properly independentWe will give back to patients and their doctors the power to choose. ecient. Taetway amy patients will gsiomentcstoms endof State. Access to the funding will be decided by criteria laid appointments body, and ensure that ministers cannot.. treatment in the NHS. down by a panel of senior clinicians and academics.
Patients will be able to be treated in the hospital which theyCare by doctors they know, without the needIto ga to hospital.“We will stop politicians from interfere in its workings, so that people who work in the NHSWe will, for example, encourage the development ofqqFFj,; ooand their GPs choose, and will have full access to informationChoice for patients extends to private healthcare.,, Conservatives will ensure that important issues of medical..._.
GRO GHESEN FEGEUES Gi tHE GETS, MS inet [seesesate? weitere Olrathstand-alone surgical units specialising in a particular typeethics are properly debated in Parliament. interfering in clinical on hospitals’ waiting lists and success rates to enable them toBecause of the problems in the health service many people+ standardfichtaracthi
The quality of the care people receive in hospital is determined7of standard operation, such as cataract surgery or hip.. F eypeor°Mehe iinet Gntstea, with modest incomes spend their hard-earned savings on7decisions and in the running as much by standards on the ward as by their surgical, aicintsfifdical ifreplacements. These units would be funded by the NHS
Hospitals will be rewarded for the operations they carry out, Paying privately for operations or for medical insurance for. j4 procedures. Yet while Ward Sisters are held responsible forApey Carrysoand be free of charge for patients, but could be operated(2) f h Osp ital Ss.
iiitthemselves and their families. In doing so, they free resources the well-being of their patients, they do not have authority overnels Goes REET CE ELEC AMOI FEVERS Ene] MALO WUE: aeby either NHS or private providers. They would enable usWe will ensure hospices are proper!
i.. and patients will be able to choose to be treated in hospitals with in the NHS and help reduce waiting times, but often at. ooeg. y many of the activities, such as feeding and cleaning, that; to make rapid reductions in the waiting times required forfunded by increasing the state’s contribution astemataa TaThere thiidworld-class expertise in their illness. considerable personal cost..
letermine the quality of the care they provide. these procedures. from 32% to 4O% for adult hospices and from 4% to 4O% for children’s hospices.
2O2l. dierreg
~~svA. oecote aeoe.
7Iler people are among our most responsible citizens and give a great deal to their communities, but they have beenWe wi / / a b fe) / is hth e iymating Idemeaned and patronised by this Government. They resent being seen as a burden. And they fear they do not have a iplace in Blair’s Cool Britannia. rule wh ich curren tly air wl wihTo be able to have the standard of living to which they are entitled, Britain's pensioners now have to apply to the State.
for special favours. When Labour came into office, 37 per cent of pensioners had to take the means test in order to getfo rcees p ensioners t (6).: Fitheir benefit entitlement. On Labour's current plans, within two years most pensioners - 57 per cent - will have to apply
‘q: Rael; to the State for help in this undignified and intrusive way. fe) uy an annul ty when
Common sense means respect andoe: oy FPensioners are proud of being able to take responsibility for themselves, but Labour has denied them this dignity. t h ey reac a 75 y. a; salt ‘asInstead they have taxed pensioners more heavily and driven them on to means-tested benefits. Y.
independence for older peopleceiagra
SF ee ifIt's time for common sense., faFiConservatives will give pensioners greater independence from the State, by cutting taxes, removing a million pensioners
¢ Cut taxes for pensionersFoa: from income tax altogether, and by increasing the basic state pension - with no strings attached.
Fra
¢ Increase the basic state pension“iF. >. beia
¢ Abolish compulsory annuities at age 75a\ Eoe.
ihiSS aaa
¢ Allow younger workers to opt for properly funded private pensionsijLgi5ti Ee 4 i: f aa -? IeeeFreeing pensioners from tax
¢ Protect the savings and homes of those needing long term carerte ansI ery Aya7]It is wrong that pensioners with modest incomes findA Conservative Government will also raise the special i ati ist 4i;
Ca CE a: themselves paying income tax. It is particularly unfair thatage tax allowance for pensioners by £2, OOO, from iipensioners who have saved for their retirement - fromaround £6, OOO to over £8, OOO per year. This will take
Htheir salaries on which they have already paid tax - areone million pensioners out of income tax altogether then taxed again on the interest their savings earn. Weand many other pensioners will pay £8.5O less tax perBY a4will abolish taxes on savings for most savers - which willweek.> i, aei.
iy! wai;: ~ [ fe: flybe of particular benefit to pensioners.4
Bi Je our lives>las
22r23“i... IWe will abolish g! OWING oO dertaxes on savingsik, il[ike tr_-‘ for most savers -a ee Se
A higher pensionLong term care..: ae; which will be ofi a
Conservatives want to provide support to pensioners when theyThis option will be available to all pensioners who get theirThe best way to achieve higher pensions in the futureWe also want to tackle another problem whicht 5Ibfi t77js articular pene?; lneed it most. This should not entail more and more pensionerspension uprated, including groups that Labour forgot - theis by more genuine funding of pensions. We wish topreys on the minds of many people as theyp facing the indignity and bureaucracy of means tests.2OO, OOO in nursing homes and residential accommodationenable young people to build up a funded alternative tobecome older - meeting the costs of long-termt O p ensioners who do not receive the winter fuel payment and 36O, OOOthe basic pension for the future. Noone would be forcedcare. Our proposed funding of the NHS matches
So we will offer pensioners a substantial increase in the4. pensioners living abroad. to change. The basic state pension would continue toLabour's plans and includes a commitment that all'I basic state pension.?
Funded. be paid as now, not merely to current pensioners butnursing care will be free at the point of use. But. oo. unded pensions
ASCUP IES CPSU WD Use [PaNELENS, In Aull Ave, WHto people of working age and new entrants who wantwe need to go further to get at the source of the will match the Government's plans for an increase of £3 aThe best way to make sure that people have decentinto mune, Wa willearsuliom jew lreatit citeranaistamn.
week for a single pensioner under 75 and £4.8O for aincomes in their retirement is for them to invest during... AF7 le.
this new option of funded pensions for young people. Wowllesretleshem sentowtra tere medsYour pension with the Conservatives married couple under 75. their lives in assets that will grow. But the state takes
We will also abolish the rule which currently forcesprudent provision in advance for the cost of long
-‘.‘ipeople’s national insurance contributions and then fails to lui we wall 9 iene Ine ang) lets [PemMSTATENS, Whito Kelpensioners to buy an annuity when they reach 75. term care can be protected from having theirpecctetntepencionTedacita penceValuclciipencion
_7.‘invest them, leaving pensioners with miserly pensions.» to be poorer. Over-75s will have a bigger uprating of £4 forPeople with personal pensions will only need toarasia tallem layne stat tf taeiracituell ema coats2OOl/O22OO2/O3with optional consolidated:5A7We need to make it easier for people to provide for a(Conservative plans)special payments
CN) PENSLNET Ene) AAD ere melas CoM, WS wallensure that they have sufficient income to keepare more than could reasonably be foreseen.. iitoctiprosperous retirement.
be helping poorer pensioners without more means-testing. RectotimecnerectedlsenctitctSingle pensioner£72.5O£75.5O£78.6O. aiABut Labour have hit private and occupational pensions
Pensioners can carry on receiving the free TV licence, thesh higher taAndth; fiThe remaining capital in the pension fund will be theirsMarried pensioner couple£ll5.9O£l2O.7O£l24. OO:: with higher taxes. many of the current generation
Winter Fuel Payment, and the Christmas bonus exactly astolegpencdl<if thayuisn topes emt thet chitdtem at present. But, if they prefer it, we will give every pensionerof working people have expectations of the pension theySingle pensioner over 75£72.5O£76.5O£8l.75:-‘‘-iare likely to receive which are unfortunately way ahead the choice to opt for a higher basic pension, which consolidatesyy wayMarried couple over 75£ll5.9O£l22.7O£l28.2O these individual payments, tax-free. Gi tine hey weelling
2425a world leader28 a stronger society32 town and country36 a civilised country4O a proud democracy44 wevei- I.+ tg ESE s oo Settee32 I ReRer os iar "eelei iToes eee, i crag a lees Baise hi set tar aaaeePe iS hyfe te ea ee
Biinsucenarea Pris: oa br eu aes RIIcc i cae‘os Ie aa SS a Iaii ‘ poe oe Dy Coy fos
“a Ua eeeee, a ei ee ee ee ‘Es&: A OWL, “a
Bis pk aI She? Cae eS Cea ee” A G7 fas
Hae eg ante ae ae MyRyeo She, co Petes eek re Te oy. ibee htA ee Nei get 6 tae/ ey4 by anu iefu. aeec aary cae eae aeaye a93 is ee yd¢ al De if ii a ee sviet ad man ee Soom gra efeeeAENYaWo irtae“Britain is one of the world’s most respected democracies, one of its most influential leaders, one of its most: tala aprosperous nations and one of its greatest military powers.
i caeOur possession of all of these qualities, which we rightly value, depends upon our ability to govern ourselves. And all oft: e a re I e ireeuthem are put at risk by the threat that is now posed to our independence.; ahcenLabour have lost confidence in our ability to govern ourselves.! 4 fi: efiIt's time for common sense.
7,‘The next Conservative Government will secure our independence and use Britain’s great strengths to help create
Common sense means valuing what makes us';; vmsds99P/
‘3a flexible Europe of nations, to maintain the Atlantic Alliance and to develop the role of the Commonwealth.¥r distinctive as a nationHie rtsrh
In Europe, not run by Europetrading and competitive EU, countries need only participate inThe next Conservative
¢ A more flexible European Unionae-«.-g new legislative actions at a European level if they see this as in
The guiding principle of Conservative policy towards theGove mmen t wi i / keep the
°Ftheir national interest.
Veto further transfers of power from Westminster to BrusselsEuropean Union is to be in Europe, but not run by Europe. pound We will maintain our. At the same time, we are willing to support the principle of:
¢ No European army outside NATOWe will lead a debate in Europe about its future, promoting our.
‘reinforced cooperation’ in Europe, under which small groups ofn atio n al ve ie) on Europ ean own clear and positive vision.
¢ Global free trade by 2O2Ocountries can become more closely integrated if they wish to do/. / tiDy
A safe hfthThe European Union has, with the prospect of enlargement, so, providing it does not damage Britain’s national interest. ee
¢ A safe haven, not a soft touch, on asylum..
Yreached a fork in the road. Down one route lies a fully
The next Conservative Government will keep the pound. We will integrated superstate with nation states and the national vetoo.. a.
maintain our national veto on European legislation. Giving up disappearing. The Government is taking us down this route either would put our ability to govern ourselves at risk. We will not
The alternative is a Europe of nations coming together inratify the Nice Treaty but will renegotiate it so that Britain does not:‘different combinations for different purposes and to differinglose its veto.
Aly:. extents. In other words, a network Europe. If Britain leads the..“
LeeWe also propose to amend our domestic law to include‘We want early enlargement of the inaedebate, ke this alt ti lity....:: SEE IML AU SEL LIS)“reserved powers”. This will prevent EU law from overriding theEuropean Union - the first wave, including; i: We will insist on a Treaty ‘flexibility’ provision, so that outside thewill of Parliament in areas which Parliament never intended toCyprus, should be admitted by 2OO4.” areas of the single market and core elements of an open, free-transfer to the EU.
2829This policy will be reinforced with a determination to veto furtherhave also come under attack from those more interested in politicalWe will also end this Government's equivocation over theMultilateral aid and development institutions are crying out forThe Commonwealth has huge potential - as a force forThis Government has allowed a crisis to develop which has transfers of power from Westminster to Brussels. Should any futurecorrectness than operational effectiveness. At the same time, ourdevelopment by the US of ballistic missile defences. We believereform. In particular, we are calling for the EU to set its house instability, for promoting the rule of law, democracy and theencouraged an illegal trade in human misery, blighting many lives.
Government wish to surrender any more of Parliament's rights andprimary alliance, NATO, is being weakened by a concerted drive toour close ally deserves our support in countering new threatsorder. Unless the Commission reforms its management, we willopen economy, and potentially as a means of focusing UK.7
The problem here is worse than anywhere else in Europe power to Brussels they should be required to secure approval forcreate an independent military structure in the EU. And for the firstfrom rogue states and terrorists equipped with weapons ofpropose a treaty amendment allowing member states to deliveraid. We will consult with our partners on implementing manybecause of Labour's mismanagement. The Government has h a transfer i ef. i itii i iiii ildiid bil if thidati of thIth ission.
such a transfer in a referendum. time, a British government is leading this attempt. mass destruction. We will take a lead in building support foraid bilaterally instead. of the recommendations of the Commonwealth Commissionpresided over massive delays in processing applications and
We intend to press for the single market to be completed and forA Conservative Government would pursue a very different policy. WallSslomissi ctsiene. egelinsillansets to Evie eis) AEE. We will press for more effective debt relief, action on HIV/AIDSWe will use Britain's influence in the world for peace andadmits that thousands of those whose cases are rejected competition laws to be stronger so that British businesses whichiiitain’s iiiiistability, whether in Kashmir or Cyprus or the Middle East. simply disappear and never leave.
IplgWe think it is common sense to support institutions that work. OurWe remain fully committed to Britain's independent nuclear deterrent. and conflict prevention and resolution. ity, ypplypps play by the rules are not undercut by other companies that do not. va armed forces and NATO work very well.5iiigiBritain has vast global reach. In a world where geographiIn four years, Labour has seen the cost of the asylum system yComing to the aid of othersWe will appoint an Envoy for Religious Freedom. ggeographyy'y! ys
We will also press for Europe to tackle fraud and maladministration.. matters less, Britain is not on the periphery of anything. double and put a great strain on many communities.
So we will support our armed forces by setting out to match as a matter of priority. If the EU reduced waste and abandoned ill;/a; Playing our part in world leadership means playing our part inTaking a lead in the worldUniquely, we have a central place in the EU, NATO, the_-:
commitments to capabilities, by making it a priority to achievehelping the davelnetaofOur policy will be that all new asylum applicants are housed._oohelping the development of other countries... aHi considered programmes, it could make significant reductions in theinelannedioreenltrannindievesteanclevionpecivclson(celThe world is changing. The old power blocs are decliningCommonwealth and the UN. A Conservative governmentin secure reception centres until their cases are determined.
Grenelllcize Ci (ino [ELepEEIN LUE gaicorrectness. We will exempt the armed forces from the EuropeanWe will work towards the UN aid target of O.7% of GNRin importance. Nations, and networks between nations, aremiko euimenHesing) Cehy cme iD wlThis will speed up the process of establishing which claims oAiitjiFF;; taking centre stage. are well-founded. Asylum applications from safe countries
A military power and a staunch allyCamsenitan cnn Aine igs, Neves ewes, Sein, FaLiaeetWe will do what we can to encourage responsible behaviour by aidggA safe haven, not a soft touch, on asylumpeels aanMKS Kcrecipients, by focusing on good governance, and by strengtheningConservatives will build on Britain's strengths, so Britain can_MT esate Slt each
One of the reasons that Britain is respected around the worldi.,, Over the centuries Britain has welcomed people who have been... onWe will seek greater flexibility to deal with unplanned commitmentscivil society, free markets, the rule of law and anti-corruptionbe a force for good. Britain has prospered when trade has.. We will ensure that those whose claims are rejected are is that it remains a first-class military power. persecuted by oppressive regimes overseas.
and to reduce overstretch. We will reform the Territorial Army andmeasures. been free. We will lead the campagin for a trans-Atlantic freequickly deported by a new Removals Agency.
The British way of life and freedom and democracy around thea:.. AaBut now our ability to be a safe haven for the genuinely oppressed world are madie more secure by the profeasloneliam of ourenhance the role of the Royal Auxiliary Air Force and our otherWe will increase the involvement of charities and the voluntary(EU EEE) CAECNPESS IG HS EY ais] NAFUA. WIS SQSkpis severely hampered by the virtual collapse of our asylumConservatives will restore common sense to Britain’s: Reserve Forces. caaien WWawil@auitlatie pegaiiongt quretilimdecignenttlimurhtowards our vision of global free trade by 2O2O. Britain has an:; asylum procedures.
armed forces and the success of our long term military alliances. P745FFsystem. This chaos encourages unfounded asylum claims... asunrivalled diplomatic service. We will strengthen it further by
Conservatives have always supported stronger European defenceaid charities, as they are often better placed than governments
Yet now all this is under threatcreating a new Foreign, Commonwealth and Trade Office toBritain has gained a reputation as a soft touch for bogus cooperation, but always inside NATO. We will not participate in ato relieve suffering. We will also establish a central informationaaaBd. - i.. it ipl id free t together, givi ed ii tl I Kers.
The last four years have seen our armed forces come understructure outside NATO, but will insist instead that any Europeanservice, Aid Direct’, that will build strong direct links betweenbring diplomacy and free trade together, giving renewed impetusasylum seekers.
increased pressure. Overstretched and undermanned, theyinitiative is under the NATO umbrella. aid donors and recipients. totic alts) CainmneKee.
3OSiloe r: eteat: 7A strong society rests on responsible individuals and families. They need to be able to turn to straightforward, reliable
4; help when times are bad. But that should not become dependence on the state when times are good.
aSs@) ni g eCLabour promised to reform the welfare state, but they shirked the challenge.
etIt’s time for common sense.
li aR ei, LThe next Conservative Government will help build a stronger society. We will provide support for individuals and
-erefamilies when they need it. And we will encourage people to take responsibility for themselves and their families.
Tolerance is one of Britain’s historic virtues. A strong society is built on respect for all people - whatever their race, religion, gender or sexual orientation.
Common sense means responsible citizens, m and a smaller statea¥Welfare without the state
Many of our poorest people are forced to struggle with afamilies, faith communities and voluntary groups a voice
¢ Create an Office of Civil Society to champion families, i. F mess of complicated and ill thought out governmentat the heart of Government. The Office will cut through voluntary organisations and faith communities ecwt: schemes. And at the same time, the Government isthe bureaucracy that stops the good neighbours of aReform taxation ton charitiesbi7i! squeezing out genuine voluntary groups, who are bestBritain from helping those in need.
“Te aé
¢ Pay independent groups to get people back to work and*irable to help people in real need. We hope to help charities by abolishing their irrecoverable find thlasting job
HATO SET esj"? Conservative policy will be very different. VAT liabilities. The Government refuses to be frank about
¢ Protect the savings of disabled people and help them find workih¥; isthe money that Whitehall departments have set aside for
%. iyA Conservative Government will tackle the problems
7preparations for converting to the euro, but we believe
* Tackle welfare fraudof poverty and disadvantage with the same vigour and;;,, they are substantial. We will divert this money to fund this i, ai- erinventiveness with which we tackle Britain's economicmajor reform of taxation for charities,
‘problems. Central government will not try to do everything by itself. Instead we will work with volunteers, charitiesEffective help for unemployed people and local institutions to bring new life to our communities...
It is a cruel trick on unemployed people to place them
We will establish a new Office of Civil Society to giveon training schemes which often do little or nothing to
32)33)a aonpe. 2F a stronger societyBritain Is made up of many ethnic---
“ge.: yscrake. i communities. Conservativesoee improve their long-term employment prospects. Helping people into the labour marketWe will address this problem by creating a new agency whichb e I leve th a t we are rl ch eran dhey Hee elie pal:
i, ill pay Iity Benefit on the basis oftt entitlements. it.”paleiFerrer tei aera
Labour's New Deal raised people's hopes but hasThere is evidence that it is in the best interests of children of a loneCPE eS PSE EE NCINUISISSS SG NEM Cush carsstron ger for it. Con aipamaehmaetgaetete aleee lateral, P. aBut it will also have the funds to obtain the physiotherapy or thece, 25. neeHight es oie failed to deliver. Unemployment has fallen more slowly underparent for that parent to be working when the child is of secondaryea ie gageel A eee. hysical aids which can help disabled people back to work asSaiee aaLemania:
this Government than under the last one. school age. It increases the chances that the child will get goodPa2veeitn Iangoaa oo.; quickly as possible. i ee ad Tie aed
The next Conservative Government will help unemployedqualifications and go on successfully to hold down a job. ey ce I eet cece Ey isi ii ato people back into work more effectively than ever before. We will therefore expect lone parents on income support withAn effective attack on fraudved he ul aie. aaae wien:
We will replace the New Deal with ‘Britain Works’. Independent Children over ll to be actively seeking the sort of jobs which theyInstead of reforming welfare, Labour have made it evenae Hy i é 4 sega ie ¢ eecena ee contractors will be rewarded not just for their success in helpingcan} combine withiiiicigramiy tes pops bites: more complex. Instead of encouraging self-reliance theyFd. aaj the unemployed to find jobs but also for enabling them to keepLabour have treated people with disabilities appallingly - means-have spread dependence on means tests. Complicated means-AYi ail Sl ee foiane 7 oo - those jobs. testing their benefits and eroding their supported employment. It istested benefits are not just demeaning, they are also wide openwwallPeis, DERai
+to fraud and abuse. The Government itself has admitted thatf*ae Tyoanghee ate tieath i Chee Bet.
This will address one of the worst failures of this Government'stime for them to have aibetter deal!4aiRR l Cea;: there could be £7 billion of fraud. In l998/99 there were employment policies - the revolving door which takes peopleThe Government is treating the savings of disabled people on l6O, OOO established cases of Housing Benefit and Council through a cycle of benefits, training schemes, and temporaryIncome Support less generously than pensioners in the same; Tax benefit fraud, but just 8OO successful prosecutions - work, only to end up back on benefits. circumstances. This is an indefensible and unprecedented oo,;,;99.5% of fraudsters are not successfully prosecuted. We will
The best way of helping unemployed people is to get them backdiscrimination against disabled people. We will tackle it headon. WeIntroduce a tough antlfraud package, including a single
Tid WEIS ES CHIEN) ES FESS, UEUIS hie LESS Ci Or CaMnan aneintegrated task force to tackle fraud nationwide. There are 8O have before losing benefit, matching the entitlement of pensioners.
Wiis MICS CUEENIEA, UNGES WAS G2 COSMIC SDmillion National Insurance numbers which is rather more than omihe willis ihe igunemploymentDenc its)Disabled people who have lost their jobs can become trappedthe entire UK population. Some of these numbers are on Incapacity Benefit. fraudulent and we will clean them up.
3435La inp
-af -_ar "rare.4, rLocal communities are life’s essential harbours. They provide us with a strong sense of local identity. But too many are under“Earmin ga nd the cou ntrys ide
7a --arienormous pressure. Our countryside, ignored by the Government, has been devastated by the Foot and Mouth crisis. There are
Iitoo many urban and rural communities that are not sharing in our country’s prosperity and where deprivation passes fromare in crisis. Foot and Mouth
Igeneration to generation. There are other neighbourhoods where many young people cannot afford to live, despite having grown...
rere) UN rwa teradisease is but the latest in a
SRS CcIts time for common sense. series of blows inflicted on
-tn3FE" E ia anarConservatives will restore to communities a sense that they can shape their neighbourhoods, influence local architecture lSe 3S+teand improve the quality of their surroundings. And we will take etfecive action t help our rural communities and businessesour farmers.”
Common sense means valuing theka;
Erecover from the effects of Foot and Mouth.
distinctiveness of both town and countrya. aw.
Dsa; Recovering from Foot and Mouth
7The Foot and Mouth crisis has been a disaster for our countryside. to cut the bill for taxpayers and consumers, provide sustainableWe will improve animal protection and welfare by building on the
¢ Implement a Strategy for Recovery from Foot and Mouth for farms and rural
<i+Farmers have seen years of hard work destroyed in weeks. Rurallong term support for farming, and protect the environment and thesuccesses of the last Conservative Government to raise animal
ENETISSSa5i Seel i: businesses have seen their turnover collapse. Animals have sufferedcountryside. We will renegotiate the CAP so that many decisionswelfare standards in Europe.
is- a2 -: ee
¢ Establish Regeneration Companies to revitalise inner cities and housing estates/-Bi go ae ir +, fi. Tele Pets e/ AMG moMsEreg eee DED MELE WDGeni (Eien chBU [xe eau eo telcn by ie GaeMMEMs EiThe Foot and Mouth crisis has not only badly damaged farming polish bsuildine tse which threatelayeeFsrItragedy is that the crisis need not have been as widespread or soindividual member states. But has\aisoldamaged thelgenerallruralleconoryrandialithar
¢ Abolish housebuilding targets which threaten our green fieldss-‘meaesp fjah a]. te, t Bs PyiPie Sell ino SeSo a UE ete Sal geal yeaa cee instalFarmers and other rural businesses spend too much time ondepends on it. Alongside the farming crisis, rural communities are
*aoer, taimyfara
¢ Cut business rates for rural shops, pubs, garages and village post officesi eaa a ad.5I athelbesinning: form-filling and red tape. The next Conservative Government willlosing their post offices, pubs and police stations at alarming
«F Aa"The priority now must to be help the countryside recover. not enforce European regulations any sooner or more zealouslyrates.
¢ Cut fuel tax to help motoristsat
7" y fae rmFuta. Immediately upon taking office, we will implement our Strategy forthan other countries. leccuqneieruncerstandsthelecdstcirnelcountyreidetnoneven be! iois“ rd sii/o Pcs eAe POM SE POM reste MMe CuIWe will also fight for a fair deal for consumers, by introducingcares about its survival.
L, CRUE [Ds Roum feIte Tas eer SIS cesSe elihonesty in labelling and requiring the country of origin and method eaction to prevent infection entering Britain again. Welneedlalnew approach) of production of the main ingredients to be stated on the label of
The next Conservative government will protect the liberty and edFarming and the countrysideclic seci._; alivelihood of rural communities. Our policies on transport, crime,
“a. We will also renegotiate the Common Fisheries Policy. We will...
F,--Foot and Mouth disease is but the latest in a series of blows inflictedplanning and Europe will all benefit the countryside.
rinsist on national or local controls being established over our own
GNCUETHETSWe will cut business rates for rural shbs, garages and waters, whether through zonal management, or coastalhe Sle NeebeltsOps, pubs, garages wh o we are: The Common Agricultural Policy has damaged consumers, management, or in some other way. village post offices and change the rules so that they can provide ifarmers, the taxpayer and the environment. It must be reformednew, much-needed local services. We will encourage more
36s I37. aFitown and countree eas me fo lie, ageES passenger-friendly rural transport services and give communitycities. As long as people leave the cities to occupy new houses builtproblems which undermine the quality of life in these areas such asless than £8 billion on transport. Conservatives are not anti-car, butof service and safety. We will stop Labour's policy of blame andR: is fe: 5 transport schemes a tax rebate on their fuel cost. on green fields there can be no prospect of an urban revival. litter, graffiti, and dumped cars. We will also tackle insensitive siting ofwe are anti-pollution, and so we will cut taxes on cleaner fuelsshame. We will implement the Cullen Inquiry recommendations. Th aa5or i Be.:. ao:. mobile phone masts without adequate consultation. icles. i4ike’iith Bob Kiley - whiazo
Post offices round the country are closing in record numbersWe must start by making our cities places where families want to livepegand cleaner vehiclesSubject to a ‘no strike’ deal we will work with Bob Kiley - who because the Government has announced the ending of cashand put down roots. That means tackling the problems that driveWe will streamline planning procedures to make it easierWe will set out long term investment plans for roads and publictransformed the New York subway - and support his ambitions to payment of pensions and benefits at post offices. We recognise the many familes to leave. First and foremost this means education andfor new houses to be built on brownfield sites. We will give localtransport, meeting the needs of commuters, cyclists, pedestrians, EEE Me le SSSIMe ees eenshen and aes essential part played by post offices as a focus of community life. crime. In too many of our inner cities families with young childrencouncils power to declare extra areas of local Green Belt. and elderly and disabled people. We will establish a new RoadsThe wider environmenttr ategy or necovery,.. feel they have to get out to get educated. And until there is effective. an:-Paniiif. It will aii
We will remove Labour's threat and instead introduce a benefit cardyg9And we will make Britain a nation of homeowners. We will increaseStandards\UnititaI champion the imerests of road)users: ItiwilllaimConsematvesibeloventhateachtodtctehouldiactactatetarardConservatives have played a constructive role icithe st, it improving houses or. z. iinimi: a which will cut fraud and bring large efficiency gains while continuingPALA VeiiDeic San es mie peasy9the rightto-buy discounts on council homes and introduce a newLota hrouotiliiamicloutoloun stand village stand minimise ticpreserving and enhancing the natural world and the builtthroughout the Foot and Mouth crisis. We have to bring business into post offices. CHEE G IR GME uD Wil eve Mir teerentto-mortgage scheme. Homesteading grants will allow people toenuronmienialletiecis [oli oadoag willl seus ensibie speed init oyereronment ten iutirelcenerationeput forward practical policies to speed up the oe;;; aThe next Conservative Government will establish new localfirst repair, and then own empty council housing. each stretch of road, and make roads safer. eradication of the disease, give real help to
Wi will elsellsin anise phic wets Cr ieee esRetion Cies to drive thjan ti italielTacitra fram cleat ChThe biggest global environmental challenge is to prevent climatebusinesses hit by the crisis and to ease the
“lo drive the campaign to revitalise our. a. AA targets. Local councils accountable to local people should beegeneration LompaniespagConservatives will give housing associations more freedom toUnlike Labour, we will not ban people from drivingaychange causing long-term damage through extreme weathersuffering of animals.
inner cities and outer urban estates... Fiimi"ill responsible for meeting local housing needs. Where there is rapidcompete in the housing market. We will encourage greatermatoibaliyiexceed ihe l/Om pilin Gon nctonvay SauiisteaO weconditions. We will meet the commitments made by successive population growth, central government should work in partnershipWorking with local councils, businesses and people they will be ableinvolvement of tenants in running their estates. look to improve the traffic flow on motorways by increasing theBitehaovemmentsltatcemnrencreivelnerccciciemscionImmediately upon taking office we will with local councils to invest in additional infrastructure. to buy extra policing strength, help set up Partner Schools, and tearSpeedlimit to. 8O mph\where itis safeIto do so, and enforcing Ithispawnfiiechng, crekay cameeettem mEESUNES, iar ImeaTIES, implement a Strategy for Recovery including down the worst tower blocks. They will have statutory powers toTransportspeed limit rigorously. We will target the hard core of bad driversaction to:
As well as our Green Belts, we will take action to protect our rivers,"¥diate benen3biofa ana Ga mEtnearea al eattantagreater encouragement of renewable energy and cleaner. accelerate the planning and development of rundown areas. Labour promised “immediate benefits” in transport. But public-.::
wetlands, lakes, canals and coastline from development byiBga'vt has bne4energy generation.* speed up disposal of slaughtered animals ransport has become worse, while our roads are moreiBeoH::
establishing "Blue Belt" areas. We will support radical solutions to the long term decline of coastaldthBritain has the hich; We will restore the competitiveness of the British haulage,+ unblock delays in compensation for affected congested than ever. Britain has the highest road user taxes innavshaah5iiA
The Cftil establishSelect Cittowns - bringing in new measures to help them support and marketshipping, and aviation industries. We will charge foreign lorries forfarms
© Ronservalves wil @sianisn a new verecrvommines ona, So i7Europe and the worst traffic jams. Labour want to force carthe use of British roads with our Brit Disc scheme.+ offer interest-free loans for affected. z. atheir heritage, protect their coastline, improve transport links, and
Rural Affairs to monitor the impact on rural communities of alldrivers off the roads, without offering an alternative. They willbusinesses tackle the problems they face in housing asylum-seekers. We will cut tax on petrol and diesel by 6p per litre. It is technology,.
aspects of government policy. tax drivers who come into town centres, and tax those who/;+ properly fund campaigns to promote the. oeWe will also tackle the problem of ‘neighbours from hell’. We willneed to park at work. holaxation \bauc ats polloniirom We nicics: tourist industry
Uli bee inebel ens Gu biel 2lthictiiiblock high risk food imports to prevent Foot enable the eviction of residents who break tenancy agreements, fail to\ £36 billion f4but thWe will revive the railway industry so it achieves airline standards. gPP a.. Last year, Labour toolillion from road users but they spentA
The future of the countryside is bound up with the future of our innerpay their rent and desecrate the neighbourhood. We will tackle theyeand Mouth recurring
3839i L.-; aC i V ii Ss eC*Government policy towards the arts, sports and broadcasting has stumbled from fiasco to disaster in the last four years.
EThe Government wasted millions of pounds on bailing out the Dome, botched the development of Wembley stadium, dithered over the new UK Sports Institute, and supervised a bizarre competition to run the National Lottery only to end
F]up handing it back to the existing firm.
Cc oO Ul n[ yi "raElThis incompetence has been accompanied by a disdain for British traditions and a modish contempt for our heritage.
if7Labour even promoted a bogus new culture - ‘Cool Britannia’ - in an attempt to supplant the culture and identity which pa. rapsea: + aijISs“has shaped us.
II. Ft: etCommon sense means supporting the people that: iTay3It's time for common sense.
create a thriving culture“5l\c 4JA Conservative Government will be optimistic about Britain’s future because we are comfortable with Britain’s past.
e4a- ig
¢ Free arts organisations from dependence on the state7 by giving them endowmentsl H
Pl ‘i -
* Back the tourism industry~
Freeing our culture from political interference
¢ Privatise the commercially successful Channel Four9P
* Simplify regulation of British broadcasting and communicationsThe last Conservative Government transformed the funding © Wewill set about freeing the arts from Government interference.
¢ Support youth, grass roots and elite sportof sport, the arts and our historic environment by creating.
[Pe nb (2)LiUsing the proceeds from the sale of Channel 4 and
_lin NeWenel Lelieins WO Cunsulieel tints ones een alsundistributed surpluses from the Lottery, we will create a“: a,.
ee\i"a ICONS WHS CUS MSTEN COMME TSENG) Gea £3 billion endowment fund for cultural organisations., wliedCelniEee beepsThis will dramatically extend freedom from State er;:‘iLabour have increasingly taken control of Lottery funds. The dependency and political control.
t._: BOLE ale GION [Seen ie Lei gy EES EEConservatives recognise the role of the arts in developing aiaiioe Z4 rae7caia.
a: etr, CREE Coupiss Women ei, GO tEw Hyerthe creative skills which are essential to Britain’s
Tre oelPa!4.
je fjBa'more accessible to small community groups. future prosperity menitaamt‘ who we areaM3
4O4a'a7 ar“Conservatives recognise a civilised countryie «~~ the role of the arts ineeRae developing the creative skills tad see. Yas
We will undertake a radical review of the Arts Council ofBut our future success is threatened because too fewFreeing the media andWe will introduce early legislation to create a single... eearebe ' Hat oo; which are essential toPampas! atlsheet
England and the Regional Arts Boards. We want to create ayoung people get the chance to take part in sport at school. communications industriesregulator for the media and communications industriesty"ceil! fl ae ney less bureaucratic funding structure which delivers more for theaanfcharged with speeding up the introduction ofBritain s fi uture p r OSsp erl ty. Laat! igeA ane
Conservatives will give back to headteachers and governorsOur best media companies lead the world in qualityoe! arFr. Tigi ah nis eis) ferrennisisthe right to offer adequate time for sport. We will also giveand innovation. Gompititon, Wie will isnale MEGA CaneNiss tremayai cas
Britain’s £65 billion tourist industry is a powerful force for urbanfurther protection to playing fields.. iGIVES) GHMERETD TUES GMs] GSU tine ERIE US“4 ‘(a ‘‘anealel
Conservatives deregulated the telecommunicationstiitviized walresitan aiataPaaa* and rural regeneration. Under Labour, Britain's trade deficit inFansminimised, wile protecting me vulnerable tromaeFifaual
We will reform the law to enable local voluntary sportsmarket and Britain was well placed to benefit from theonescostri.4ais ghlltiy‘TE offensive material. sen SE:
tounemIhasI doubled and)tounstbusibesses nave been Ihitibyclubs to apply for charitable status, strengthening theirconvergence of media and communications technologies.
a tide of new regulations. We will back Britain around theOur policy will deliver fair and independent regulation financial base and encouraging private investment in..;.. But we are throwing away our head start. Labour have;.
world by increasing support for the British Tourist Authority and.. of the BBC. The regulator will require the BBC to grassroots sport, and helping to safeguard their assets..7..,. astalled over liberalising telecommunications. The numerous; restoring a voice for English Tourism. This will be all the moreFmake the most of its assets for the benefit of the for future generations.. aBown;;,;; overlapping regulatory authorities in the communications. a; important in the light of the disastrous impact of Foot andlicence fee payer but to rein in any expansion plans“ To ny Blair said that the Dome would be a vivid symbol of. We will look to streamline the over-complex fundingindustries urgently need rationalising..;
Mouth disease on the whole sector. which are hostile to competition.; structures for sport, reducing the number of quangoes;, asLabour's Britain. That is exactly what it was. Step inside and you
The next Conservative Government will make BritainaenllGacineifatans inerclesetealy
Championing sport. ooe will ensure that religious broadcasters have.
eS teand devolving more funds to a more rationalisedonce again a beacon of competition in the communications.-could be anywhere - it was banal, anonymous and rootless..-fair and equal access to future competitions for local,
The success of our athletes in the Sydney Olympics showednetwork of governing bodies. iaguatiios,9A)9Ps national, digital and programme service licences. It lacked a sense of Britain’s history or culture.
how important sport can be in creating a sense of national
We will privatise Channel 4, while maintaining its public pride. The dedication and skill of our Olympic team was service remit. The State has no business owning a supported by funds from the National Lottery, established by commercial TV company.
the last Conservative Government. We will ensure that our elite athletes get the funding they need to achieve excellence in the future.
4243;\ei,. Ru eee ee
2 keeial ’cas yee eed ty, af i A ae as Ai4 ha a[ Odi A 4 \ 4 Pa \ aIF ai a ‘i ie oe Ng eo. Britain’s democracy has always been one of our greatest strengths. It has made our country what it is, and has embodied and defended our freedoms.
‘5: Fe a a. a a iP i i per'A? But after four years of Labour, the way we govern ourselves has been abused. We have an arrogant and complacent Government which ignores Parliament and people. We have the
“i: cs hs ssee ay id aN ip» Ei a pay, anomaly of MPs from Scotland and Northern Ireland voting on laws that apply only to England and Wales. The House of Lords, historically a source of balance and independence, has isad Ae ay i Pt) ee oei rs f; suffered a botched reform.
wsa tce he o Sey ic Pam oe” eesot q MesPeople identify with their local communities. But under this Government they are being marginalised by alien new regional bureaucracies that are costly, unaccountable and unnecessary.
yye ag oN aa? tia he \ ‘4i. Nem Lt, AOur constitution is being perverted, and faith in politics and politicians is at an all time low.
Common sense means fewer politiciansKg O eel Wed pat CHE; IS Cli tera Canes... kek ft <a 2, ie ge Pi Tg 7a4pe5inn rroraneIA Conservative Government will revitalise our democracy by giving more power to local people, and once more placing Parliament at the centre of our national life.
and more local decision-makingoeSe, ray \ ae 454) Vig ae UA Digs(a-
- “ Br" h ii i: a i, Al Nyrsioe
Branste ti powemomice niall gove Mime ti tclete cdveiloc all Ounc lis&P l ee i iAne A; ‘. Ww,‘ ve ogRevitalising local governmentNot use its powers to cap local council budgets. enterprise and development back to county councils, and to
BeyBA ee oe ae 3 Thal yf ¢J# Le. fl... F:. unitary authorities where appropriate, and save the £7O million
« Local referendums before large increases in Council TaxTasi eySieh LP geY) FePeople feel at home in their local communities, be theyWe will abolish many of the national targets and plans that asstp: eC a Hay4anea year that the RDAs are spending in administration.._..._--ue fi, ay “a mA 4 } +,: fylg, % e: icounties, towns, villages or parishes. local councils are forced to follow by Whitehall.
¢ Abolish artificial regional tiers of administration in Englandbi ale % igh hee P‘aLifif ree iaAit i iiRestoring balance in the constitution yyeee on aePdiiri\, But real communities are being weakened by too muchAlongside this policy of granting greater freedom to the best
+ Reform Parliament so that only English and Welsh MPs vote on exclusivelybe % OePe ey if Ff, cow f Ia: government from Whitehall, and by the imposition of artificialcouncils must come some protection from abuses by the worst. Britain’s constitution has never been set in stone, but. j cy, aeLs -. i F*{a.,
English and Welsh mattersYaar ‘ Moe eeoe! a\\’new layers of government with which people don't identify. So we will look at ways in which local councils proposinghas evolved and adapted to cope with the changing
Pera ae i s, oe a ee\ ti
MstrenathenIparlamentanyfecrutinlonthelGavernment4 we ont; fj iaBUhyThe next Conservative Government will revolutionise theincreases in their budgets significantly above the rate ofcircumstances of different centuries. Because Labour
HS roma ig oe ae. iiti fe:.; f f7*attitude of central government to local government. inflation can be obliged to hold a local referendum on thedo not understand how the history and stability of our
Ve A ed ne oo Mat oyiu{I éaes asThe bestis offeJlent value f7increase in the Council Tax which this would entail. We willdemocratic structures have underpinned our national ay Haute eae ItiIe best councils offer excellent value for money and serve ae * fla. A, Neaiea\ tofIalso retain Section 28 of the Local Government Act. life, they have altered them in a crude, unthinking
OeiA7!‘Ger} V/4their communities well. Conservatives believe that councils ie‘ial‘iil. F. way, often for narrow party advantage.
A ae@ ‘. Feat im <\that have such a track record of success should be trustedLabour have introduced a new tier of regional bureaucracy.
‘ Viin eyqeh/Lewith more power. They will be able to become “free councils”. But almost noone identifies with the arbitrary regions intoAs Conservatives have demonstrated in our constructive a Ki) hed * foe 5O)iII IafWe will devolve financial and administrative power from centralwhich the country has been carved up - they owe nothing toparticipation in the Scottish Parliament and Welsh; \\ ny PS, \ te 4@> errwe Eee a oesgovernment to them, and establish a stronger link betweenwhere people feel they actually belong, Assembly, we will work to ensure devolution is a success.: Ni iah i 4PLT aathe money they raise and the money they spend. We will abolish the Regional Development Agencies thatBut we will restore balance to our vandalised democracy.
who we areWat Vi Ii -\ os‘ AgWe believe that local citizens should decide how much theirthe Government has introduced and scrap Labour's plans for a i» i iw; l3) e bE: eecouncil will spend. The next Conservative Government willnew Regional Assemblies. We will give responsibility for
44Wace C RE le eae45 l a“ ae ht eaeWhen Parliament is discussing something that affects theNorthern Irelandthat weakens the ability of the police and army to upholdConservatives have a vision of what our country can be when it is true to its whole of the United Kingdom, all MPs should vote. But onlyoothe rule of law and protect the people of Northern Irelandown character.
As a Unionist party, we value the contribution that
English and Welsh MPs will be entitled to vote onNorthern Ireland makes to the United Kinadomagainst terrorism.
Government Bills relating to England and Wales. And6fives nave alheld th9 ol th ohRestoring faith in politicsWe want strong families and enterprising business. We want a free and onservatives have always upheld the principle that theF4fiF
EnaienNiestslonetullvotstontthelremenninellewstanictresponsible society. We want to govern ourselves, confident ina stable and apply exclusively to England(lune ey Neninsiin eens wal ES eects ees EyAt a time when the Government has interfered as nevertrusted constitution. This manifesto sets out the vision that will inspire the democracy and consent and never by violence. The nextbefore in everyone's lives, they have abandoned any pretencenext Conservative Government.
In changing the way Parliament works our overriding objectiveConservative Government will resolutely maintain Northernof accountability. No wonder the British people_.:; will be to strengthen the ability of the House of Lords and theIreland’s position within the United Kingdom, in accordancehave become disillusioned with politicians. It’s time for a Government that will deliver.
House of Commons to hold the Government to account. Wewith the democratically expressed wishes of the greater will strengthen the independence of the House of Lords asqUMbErGH is wenatteWe want to return to people responsibility for their livesIt’s time to support marriage and the family; time for a war on crime; time aqatieetvanatsing eheniser ty aeeuttng aewmentaera toby reducing the level of political interference and regulation. to cut taxes and regulation; time for our schools and hospitals ie) benefit;. Conservatives continue to believe that the Belfast AgreementAnd that involves reducing the number of politicians. from choice and freedom; time to show respect to our pensioners; time for be approved by an independent appointments commission..--..-aprama]ea@anatf both HFoffers the best chance for lasting peace and political stability.; real savings not welfare dependency; time to endow our universities; time e will set up a Joint Committee of both Houses olTinalcevtolp cereselst nan taininejconicencetonfelltidesWe will abandon the Government's plans for a new tierto rebuild our inner cities; time to end the crisis in the countryside; time
Parliament in order to seek consensus on lasting reform iniiticiiLiii gSo the next Conservative Government will work tirelessly andCiegmel pene Eig eueh Womlenin mussto be in Europe, but not run by it.
the House of Lords. We would like to see a stronger House of..:. of government ministers and, once we have strengthened constructively to bring about the full implementation of all.
Lords in the future, including a substantial elected element..._parliamentary scrutiny, we will reduce the size of theIt’s time for common sense.
aspects of the Agreement, including the decommissioning of
Conservatives will support reforms of the House ofillegally-held terrorist arms and explosives. House of Commons. f
Commons to make ministers more accountable. As a firstiitiii ole naitursintngiintctdpratserentretwor teniaAnd we will cut the number of political advisers and spin+--I i, step we will once again require the Prime Minister to appear". as
Bgql#2Royal Ulster Constabulary and the armed forces in fightingCES CPE AEH, GLUE EXPE aS GPSS WESNE. oa before the House of Commons twice a week, and make sure. i agovernment ministers. l“J terrorism. Improvements to the overall security situationf that Select Committees are independent of party managers. oo,. I..
will inevitably bring about changes, but reductions in securityayF
We reaffirm our commitment to keeping Britain’s voting.._.} will only be made on the basis of the prevailing terrorist system for general elections...
threat. Conservatives will not countenance any measure
4647; i ee aa4
\4 dl,
¢ar iefa.\I
Oaety ah\,; i ‘Te a\
-wa o 38 abE