aLa7 " iecerJ
* i ate grad 2Bi 2a
_7a ie,.5ot at SeRc sethee a op7a aa aanid:°a “ “oe sa,‘;-iea eeoreo7eae
_-,-ee e, i: nhs a Sareete 3 iemrRies i- Ee ieen. eet fe afest ie Sees ct oHgit
AES4:
pee Nees*Sirsa
Eary iene5act
Tee ete a: fea iyPeingires aay Sue fs_qee, ties. 5: TS eeea:2
The Prime Minister sets out his vision for Britain’s future
Economic pledge
Key measures for public service reform
Schools pledge
How we expand our economy and raise our living standards
Health pledgel6
How investment and reform will improve public services
Crime pledge24
How we help people into work and provide security for those who can’t work
Families pledgeHow we tackle crime and renew our society
How we make foreign policy work for Britain and the wider world
A lot done, a lot to do, and a lot to lose
Our key steps for a second term
How Labour has fulfilled its first-term promises
This manifesto contains the details of our plans for the future of Britain.
If you would like to find out more about our policies, join the Labour Party or make a donation to Labour’s election fund, please call O87O5 9OO 2OO or visit our website at a ’! Br
S}ag ies“aA
FeI
’_aw ~¥But these are only the foundations of larger change. Nowis by weaknesses of elitism and snobbery, vested interests
Bg deacons’-the chance to build the future properly, to make the second _and social division, complacency bred by harking back to the aaterm the basis for a radical programme of British renewal: to past. We achieved spurts of economic growth, but inflation i, xiDokeep a firm grip on inflation, with low interest rates andthe - would then get out of control. Our welfare state was founded af 4 etpublic finances sound, and then build the dynamic andto offer security, but its progress was stalled. We reached
T - ioiproductive economy of the future; to keep investment coming out to Europe, then drew back to become semi-detached.
rinto public services and then making the reforms so we useIt is as if a glass ceiling has stopped us fulfilling our k}; the money well; to refashion the welfare state on the basispotential. In the 2lst century, we have the opportunity to
%of rights and responsibilities, with people helped to helpbreak through that glass ceiling, because our historic
Pthemselves, not just given handouts; to ensure all familiesstrengths match the demands of the modern world.
iJare safe in their communities by tackling crime and itsWe can use our openness and entrepreneurial flair to acauses; and to give Britain back its leadership role in thebecome a global centre in the knowledge economy. We can
\(-world. We need the second term to do all this. That is theuse our sense of fair play and mutual responsibility to be a
47choice: to make progress or to dismantle the foundationsstrong, dynamic, multiracial society held together by strong:4laid. And with the state of today’s Conservatives, the choice is values. We can use our historic and geographical position to stark. link Europe and America, and help the developing world.
inThis choice will decide whether more people will be able toThe key to tapping our strengths, to breaking through this x’realise their aspirations for themselves and their children- __ glass ceiling, is contained in a simple but hardto-achieve to be able to rely on a stable economy where hard work isidea, set out at the heart of our party’s constitution: the
#rrewarded by rising living standards, to receive world-classdetermination to put power, wealth and opportunity in the education and healthcare, to enjoy a dignified old age, tohands of the many, not the few.
5feel safe and secure in a strong community, and to beI know as well as anyone that we have just begun;. proud to be British. Or whether we will be held back by themillions of hard-working families want, need and deserve traditional British malaise of restricting life’s greatmore. That means more change in a second term, not ' -hs”opportunities and blessings to a minority. less - to extend opportunity for all. We reject the quiet
#IlThere is much still to be done, but we have come a longlife. We must secure a mandate for change., D"way in four years. Britain stands more prosperous, more,5equal, more respected. Our country is on a new course.
My passion is to continue the modernisation of Britain- Long-term economic stability in favour of hard-working families, so that all our children,- Rising living standards for all i! wherever they live, whatever their background, have an- Expanded higher education as we raise standards ae ie, Z\Iequal chance to benefit from the opportunities our countryin secondary schools
’l" anhas to offer and to share in its wealth.- Ahealthier nation with fast treatment, free at the
’:-point of use oi"¥-- Full employment in every region
’r a4es §I am honoured to be Prime Minister. AndI have aconfident + Opportunity for all children, security for all pensioners ial ”oo: E& Ibelief in our country. We are not boastful. But we have real +»Amoderncriminal justice system ees7rstrengths. Great people. Strong values. A proud history.- Strong and accountable local government
5 l. ia"allaThe British people achieved magnificent things inthe 2Oth - British ideas leading a reformed and enlarged Europe
»acentury. But for too long, our strengths have been undermined - Global poverty and climate change tackled
23aShifting the odds for hard-working familiesoff, better educated, better governed, better respectedquality for public services and their staff. We will build onana BSesa
In l997 we promised a start, not a revolution. We made five abroad. There has been another change too - a change ofour success in primary schools to overhaul secondary" 2specific five-year pledges. Three have been completed early; _ priorities and values. schools; we will invest new resources and empower doctors8: ct52 all will be completed within five years, as we promised. We learnt in the l98Os that looking after number one wasand nurses to transform health services; and we will seek5ksa: ae za
3Each pledge is matched by further achievement: thenot enough; that without opportunity, responsibility wasto extend the very best in culture and sport to all. az oe. -oTtr3 glowest inflation and unemployment for a generation; oneweak; that an unfair society was a less prosperous one. TheThird, we seek to modernise the welfare state. TheioLaen, itt bieaeD: g
Esmillion new jobs; over l7, OOO extra nurses, the best primary philosophy was wrong - it hurt millions of families and leftbenefits system will be restructured around work; supportasa coeBaEs
8school test results ever and, as the British Crime Surveyour country with lasting problems. for children and families through the tax and benefits systemoa8
2shows, crime is down by ten per cent.'ABER ETRE Tgwill be transformed; cash and services for pensioners will\ba: z
~We also offered a ten-point contract to the British people. I cities Coals Pe -_rd, be radically improved.~
The results are at the back of this manifesto. Not everythinggia ea- iecomaFourth, we will strengthen our communities. We will reform has gone right - it never does. But we are getting there, easing es. gl7kif, -sci ythe criminal justice system at every level so that criminals burdens and extending opportunities, by choice not chance.* eei el “i: hgare caught, punished and rehabilitated. And because weney:
Economic instability wrecks the lives of hard-workingteri aetees, Aknow that without tackling the causes of crime we willigéie:
families. So we chose to put the public finances right. ee ee‘anever tackle crime, we will empower local communities byey, fe.
It meant tough decisions that were opposed by theig Fnieaecombining resources with responsibility. aSemaBsr
Conservatives. But today the economy is stable andgn *; Hi eetIFifth, we will turn our inner confidence to strength abroad,_: Bae Er. ee growing, and interest rates are nearly half the level theyaryae kG{in Europe and beyond, to tackle global problems - above all, ERer averaged under the Conservatives. Ftiy *4environmental degradation and the shame of global poverty. z255 ee;
Unemployment steals dignity. So we chose to introduce aheya%, We will engage fully in Europe, help enlarge the EuropeanfineHeee windfall tax on the excess profits of the privatised utilities:. 47: Union and make it more effective, and insist that the British sore jobs, more dignity, more wealth... Tony Blair with construction workers in North Tyneside and to use the money to help unemployed people back toP agAgeepeople have the final say on any proposal to join the Euro. is dangerous and ill thought-out. Standing up for Britain work. That was opposed by the Conservatives, who areif3HiaeThese ambitions are summarised in ten goals for 2OlO. means fighting for Britain’s interests in Europe, not leaving now pledged to abolish the New Deal. But today, youth*+aywt,4They will never be achieved by government alone. We know it Eyrope - which threatens our national interest.
unemployment is at its lowest level since l975 and long-. b! &is people who ultimately change the country. Ourpartnership -_§9 the choice Britain faces today is starker than in l997.
wm unemployment at its lowest level since l978. or. Iwith the voluntary sector has steadily strengthened sinceThe Conservatives have swung further to the right. And, in oor education is a cruel injustice. So we chose toee tevrl997, as we learn from its diversity. We work with the private government, Labour’s agenda has become increasingly introduce a new system for teaching the basics in primarygejsector, drawing on its vitality. Countries only prosperonthe -_ oid and ambitious.
schools. We met opposition, and the Conservatives want; basis of partnership -- between government, employers andFor many years, the Conservatives claimed to offer to roll back our programmes. But today, primary schoolsBetter primary school results than ever before. now we focus on secondary schoolstheir employees, and the voluntary sector. What Britaineconomic strength while Labour dominated social issues.
are achieving their best results ever. We have shown we are a reformed party, competent toneeds is an active, enabling state, not ananny state, doing -_ any people found their head telling them to vote Tory,
A run-down health service causes insecurity. Sowe chose -_ govern. Now we offer more. More change, and more rewardsthings with people not to them. and their heart telling them to vote Labour.
to reform the NHS, and inject new money. Waiting lists and _ for Britain’s hard-working families: more prosperity, moreSo, while the Conservatives will spend most of this electionToday, head and heart are coming together. New Labour times are now down and falling, and the number of nursesopportunities, more security. telling you what their government cannot do, this manifesto _ ig proving that it is only by using the talents of all that we get and doctors is now rising. sets out what our government can do. We know the powerahealthy economy, and that it is only by giving a stake to all
Poverty denies basic rights. So we chose to reform theAmbitions for Britainand value of markets, but we also know their limits. Nowis that we are a healthy society.
welfare state to channel extra money to the poorestStretching the family budget, finding time for children as wellthe time to renew our civic and social institutions to deliverWe have made our choice: stability not boom and bust; pensioners and poorest children. Today, single pensionersas work, holding on to mutual respect, staying healthy whenimprovements in education, health, safety, transport andinvestment not cuts; engagement not isolationism; the can look forward to a minimum income of £lOO aweek and _ there can be danger even in the air we breathe. These arethe environment. many, not the few.
pensioner couples £l54, and over one million children have _ daily worries that people face. Alot done and a lot more to do with new Labour -or a lot been taken out of poverty. They are my concerns too. But, while there is always aFighting for values, not just for election victoryfor you to lose under the Conservatives.
The centralisation of power only helps the powerful. Somarket for people who say we are doomed, that all newThe Conservatives always look back. I deeply believe that, for Britain, the best is still to come.
we chose to break the suffocating centralisation of Britishideas are bad ideas even as things improve, that we mightIn economic policy they promise to repeat the mistakesSo I ask you to continue on this journey with us. Together we government. The UK has been strengthened. Today, itis the as well curl up with our prejudices and shut the door on theof the l98Os - unaffordable tax cuts and spending cuts, can achieve so much more.
Conservatives who threaten the stability of the UK with their - world, Iam an optimist. New Labour is ambitious forfollowed by ballooning deficits, rising interest rates and the proposals for two classes of MP. Our Scottish and WelshBritain’s future and is ready to lead. old cycle of boom and bust.
manifestos, alongside this one, set out our vision forFirst, we will sustain economic stability and build deeperIn social policy their renewed commitment to cuts andae continued partnership. prosperity that reaches every region of the country. Skills, privatisation and to withdrawing the support helping to heal' Isolation from Europe does not help anyone. So we choseinfrastructure, the technological revolution - all are vital tosocial division, is just a throwback to the l98Os. Race to engage constructively in Europe, not to shout abuse from _ raise British living standards faster. We will put as muchIn foreign policy they risk not just isolation but exit frommy the sidelines. Today, Europe is moving in a direction that isenergy into helping the seven million adults without basicthe EU. Jobs, trade, investment depend on our membershipa good for Britain and good for Europe. In policy for aid, skills as we did when tackling long-term unemploymentof the European Union. The Conservative policy of opposing development and international debt relief, we have led the way. _ through the New Deal. the enlargement of Europe in the Nice Treaty and their
4Of course, there are still big problems, but we are betterSecond, we seek to achieve a renaissance of status andpledge to renegotiate the terms of Britain’s EU membership - Prime Minister and Leader of the Labour Party5Public services: investment and reform; l:; I::::;.. Economic stability: the foundationRenewing public services: education reformRenewing public services: NHS reform
Renewal of our public services is at the centre;.
of new Labour’s manifesto. New Labour believes that a stable economy is the platform for risingNew Labour believes that schools need a step change in reform toNew Labour believes that the NHS needs radical reform to fulfil its living standards and opportunity for allmake quality education open to allfounding principle of quality treatment based on need, not ability to pay
A single aim drives our policy programme: toOur ten-year goals are for long-term economic stability and fasterWe plan a radical improvement in secondary schools, building on ourThe NHS needs radical reform if it is to be designed around the needs of liberle’ntialrinwer. productivity growth than our main competitors. success in primary schools. Our aim is to develop fully the talents ofpatients. Investment is vital but not enough. Labour’s ten-year goal is a berate people s pote tial, by sp ead ) po er, We will now: each child. Our ten-year goal is 5O per cent of young adults enteringmaximum waiting time of three months as we become a healthier nation wealth and opportunity more widely, breaking: higher education. with fast, high-quality treatment, free at the point of use.
down the barriers that hold people back.- soe ay uin mortgages as low as possible, lowWe will now: We will now:. Fsoe* ensure every secondary school develops a distinctive mission including- decentralise power to give local Primary Care Trusts control of 75 toe.. reform furthhelp 7Ihkill: raPP
But this is only possible on the continuedreform further education, and help 75O, OOO adults achieve basic skillsthe expansion of specialist schoolsper cent of NHS funding, and cut by two thirds the number of health foundation of economic stability: mortgages. ewrents of newbom children to offer up to £l, OOO per year for« diversify state schools with new City Academies and more church schoolsauthorities as low as possible, low inflation and soundhild Trust Eund thileth direct more money to headteachers, more freedom for successful schools. reform re appointments em so pret by the end Ortho. every blic finances create a new Child Trust Fund for every child at birtospital appointment is booked for the convenience of the patient pu.. ws© reform provision for ll- to l4year-olds to ensure higher standards. tat geF:
increase the minimum wage to £4.2O;; F:.~ cut maximum waiting times by the end of 2OO5 for outpatient appointments in English, maths, science and information technologyfrom six months to three months and inpatients, from l8 to six months
The manifesto is com prehensive. Here we setnot raise the basic or top rate of income tax and extend the lOp band introduce new vocational options from l4 onwards, with expanded...:. strengthen regional economies with venturital funds and newrenticeshirtuniti- work with the private sector to use spare capacity, where it makes out some of the key measures for investmentStrengtnen regional economies with venture capital Tunds and’ neAPPrenicesnip OPPOrtunitiessense, for NHS patients and reform that we believe give us a historicpowers for reformed Regional Development Agenciesensure primary schools offer more chance to learn languages, music..;.:, - f hospital - ially buil ical units,.. g develop the Small Business Service and cut red tapeand sport, as well as higher standards in the basicscreate anew type or ospital - specially built surgica units managed opportunity to modernise our schools, N HS, by the NHS or the private sector - to guarantee shorter waiting times ts..+ give British le the final say i f he singl: i -quali lace f hree-year-ol. a criminal justice system and welfare state. give British people the final say in any referendum on the single currencyprovide a good-quality nursery place for every three-year-old- allow successful NHS hospitals to take over failing ones.
Renewing public services: substantial investmentRenewing public services: more frontline staffRenewing public services: welfare reformRenewing public services: criminal justice reform
New Labour believes that Britain needs investment in schools andNew Labour believes in renewing a public service ethic by givingNew Labour believes that rights and responsibilities should be at theNew Labour believes that crime can only be cut by dealing with the hospitals, not reckless tax cutsfrontline staff new freedoms to respond to public needscentre of reform of the welfare stateto lift children and pensionerscauses of crime as well as being tough on criminals
Before l997 we promised and kept to two tough years on spendingFor public services to be renewed, we will need more staff, properlyout of poverty, and help parents balance work and familyWe plan the most comprehensive reform of the criminal justice system to get the public finances in shape. Now, consistent with meeting ourrewarded. It is these frontline staff, operating in new ways, who will driveWe will continue to reform the tax and benefit system to reward work, since the warto catch, convict, punish and rehabilitate more of the fiscal rules, we promise substantial rises for key public services. To helpup standards in our key public services. We will decentralise power tonot irresponsibility. Our ten-year goals are to achieve full employment inlOO, OOO persistent offenders. Our ten-year goal is a modernised deliver our plans, our ten-year goal is the renewal of local government. make that possible. every region, to halve child poverty and tackle pensioner poverty. criminal justice system with the burglary rate halved.
We will now: We will now deliver: We will now: We will now:
- increase education spending by more than five per cent in real terms2O, OOO more nurses who will be given new enhanced roles and more- create an integrated Child Credit of cash support for children, built on- overhaul sentencing so that persistent offending results in more each year for the next three years as we increase the share of nationalpower for matrons and ward sisters with control over budgetsthe foundation of universal child benefitsevere punishment income for education in the next ParliamentlO, OOO more doctors, and access to a £5OO million Performance Fund establish a new Pension Credit for lower- and middle-income pensioners- reform custodial sentences so that every offender gets punishment increase ea nr Spending by an average of six per cent in real termsto spend on new patient services~ establish a new ‘Employment First’ interview for people entering theand rehabilitation designed to minimise reoffending yy* lO, OOO more teachers. Invest in further rapid promotion and rewardswelfare system, and integrate the Benefits Agency and Employment reform rules of evidence to simplify trials and bring the guilty to justice increase spending on our police - an extra £l.6 billion a year by 2OO3/O4for classroom excellence, more classroom assistants and help withService through major reformintroduce specialist, late-sitting and review courts to reflect crime
- increase spending on transport by 2O per cent for the next three years, ousing costs in high-cost areas» extend and increase paid maternity leave to £lOO each week forpatterns and properly monitor offenders on our way to a £l8O billion investment of public and private money for6, OOO extra police recruits, raising police numbers to their highest eversix monthsblishCriminal ARA., transport over the next ten yearslevel, with strong local leadership and proper rewards for those on esta ish anew riminal ssets Recovery Agency to seize assets O the frontline introduce paid paternity leavecrime barons and a register of dealers to tackle drugs
- use a £4OO million reward fund for local government in return for signing.. ane,. wae.. o...
up to clear targets to improve local services» expand childcare places to provide for l.6 million children introduce a victims bill of rights providing legal rights to compensation, support and informationFigoal rules consistently met, lowhors purpose Is to neh every Family notlusta WeretaseLabour’s vision for all families: higher wages, affordable mortgages, fairer taxes and better public services inflation, and interest rates as low tenyear vision: higher iving standards affordable mortgages; as possible, as we deliver long-term.:.,. wea economic stability. and fairer taxes combined with much greater investment in vitalsla teuej public services. elBescuE be
Faster productivity growth than ourfae: hiceIiit.
ne compettore, as we acmieveEconomic stability is the foundation. We know the price ofCC sirens eere9 ak ie givingboom and bust - it was paid in the l98Os and l99Os byde TF--rg*
Our next stepsmillions of hard-working families. Sa SP ara: an,"Clefi ' - Basic skills for 75O, OOO people; eed lIssaheie I
Our reforms since l997 have helped cut interest rates to nearly[PeoPaedFa;
Venture capital funds in every region half the average under the Conservatives, saving mortgageer4eertiae tin
-£l8O billion investment in transport, Payers on average £l,2OO a year. By 2OlO, we want Britain toTi.2 lossianf- Seige with 25 local railandtramschemes break away from the decades of boom and bust, as we stickEiLate.;_ cr to clear rules for spending and borrowing. We will take no-~. Bini IFS
- Raise the minimum wage to£4.2O _ risks with economic policy, make no compromise on fiscalon:: Pr colse+ <: yf eee Irae
Credit - for parents of newborn*ota rlees childrenStability comes first. But stability is not enough. We need toFaasom4lof ma produce more, better and to a higher value to raise our earning.:§ reasen Sones power and to meet our ten-year goal of faster productivity growth jae 'ier te é. ooF Ve, than our main competitors.‘eefads Grameen
We must make Britain the best place to do business inm fo: H>fcer ag
Europe - a dynamic economy, founded on skills and knowledge,_mianet.,-_-“ developing the talent of all our people, and contributing toras--,; sustainable development. That means investment by private:. a.! qt¥ and public sectors in infrastructure and skills, and the right. git~i competitive framework to support enterprise, small and large, An¢:“eat Ger manufacturing and services. i; are.{
Every extra trained, employed worker contributes to a fairer'‘ society, as well as a more prosperous one. With social failure, lda*f from school drop-outs to crime, comes economic failure.: ar ia
Fairness and enterprise go together. It is up to government toe:,:
do everything it can to help ensure that no individual and no'-_:
community is left behind. a atFeaebitzThTax and spendingLabour rewards work* set up a network of 6, OOO IT learning centrescontinue to encourage the best scientists tobusinesses around the country. We arez
3e fundamentals: aa::,., f:3 g Fiscal responsibility and monetary stability areLabour believes that if you work hard you shouldaround the countrywork in the UK, as well as making the most ofcommitted to reforming the tax treatment ofBe). the foundation of our future plans. New Labour’s __ be able to support a family. We will guarantee a- extend Individual Learning Accounts, which have __ our science base in universities (see ‘World-small business, including VAT, and to seeking a.
>The foundation of opportunity and prosperityinflation target is 2.5 per cent. We will continue - minimum family income of £225 for a 35houralready been opened by over a million peopleclass public services’). reduction in payroll burdens. Small business>
2is economic stability. We know the risks ofto meet our fiscal rules: over the economic cycle -_ week; in the next Parliament, an Employment- dramatically improve the quality and quantity of I 2. Supporting British businesswill also benefit from extending the l Op tax2 promises that cannot be paid for: thewe will borrow only to invest, and keep net debt -__Tax Credit will reward the work of people on lowprison educationGovernment cannot make a businessband. We will reform the bankruptcy laws to
Conservatives led Britain into two deepat a stable and prudent level. incomes, whether or not they have children tackle the financial barriers that prevent adults I successful. But government must create theensure second chances for people who go recessions, double-digit inflation, recordWe are pledged to raise health and education (see ‘A modern welfare state’). studying in further education. right framework to help business achievebankrupt through no fault of their own, and unemployment, l5 per cent interest rates andspending for the next three years at twice theThe first-ever National Minimum Wage forBasic skills are the start; updating skills ishealthy long-term growth. provide funds for new start-ups. We will also a doubling of the national debt. rate of the Conservative years. Labour willdouble -_ Britain, bitterly opposed at every stage by therelevant for all of us. We have created theSince l997, corporation tax rates have beenpromote the development of entrepreneurship
Choice, not chance, has turned things round. _ net public investment. And we are on track toConservatives, has been a success in our firstLearning and Skills Council for all post-schoolcut to their lowest levels ever. Companies noin the school curriculum.
Independence for the Bank of England andlong- _ save £l billionin the costs of governmentterm. It fulfils, after lOO years, a foundinglearning outside higher education. Furtherlonger face a perverse incentive to pay outWe will modernise company law to promote term fiscal rules have given the UK the mostpurchasing by 2OO3. ambition of the Labour Party. Up to l.5 millioneducation colleges have a critical role to play individends rather than invest for the future. transparency, reduce burdens on small stable and transparent economic framework inTax policy will be governed by the health ofpeople, the majority of them women, have beenthe future. We will encourage dedicatedReform of capital gains tax has given thebusiness and promote long-term economic
Europe. Britain now has the best combinationthe public finances, the requirement for publichelped; jobs have not been lost. The Low Paycolleges for under-l9s and specialist adultentrepreneur or investor new incentives forsuccess. We welcome the recommendations of low interest rates, low inflation and lowinvestment, and the needs of families, business I Commission, which we will make permanent, provision to meet local skills needs, with halfinvestment. We support vital investmentof the Cooperative Commission, which also unemployment since the l96Os. and the environment. has made clear recommendations for theof all colleges to be recognised as centres ofthrough the tax system - with allowances forcovered the significant mutual sector, and will
We are saving nearly £9 billion this yearWe have rewarded work through the newlOp _ future. New Labour will raise the minimum wagevocational excellence by 2OO3O4. The world’sexamine them with a view to strengthening from debt and unemployment, so 84p of everystarting rate of tax and the Working Families Tax to £4. lO this October, and is committed, first University for Industry now offers over 4OOa VsIfathese important parts of our economy.
extra pound of public spending goes onCredit. The basic rate of tax has been cut tosubject to economic conditions, to raising it toskills courses. For skill shortages in information ji ice Ii: I national priorities, compared to 58p under22p. We will support families through the new£4.2O in October 2OO2. technology, we will open two Technologya, af Ia7: l \3. Modernising our infrastructure for the Conservatives. Children’s Tax Credit, set at up to £l, OOO a yearInstitutes in every region to meet the risingl fhLaia ii a the information age
So we will pursue a balanced approach onfor new parents - the first recognition of theLabour rewards savingdemand for high-level technical skills.¥ i, ‘I 2* Ki a i heDigital nation the economy with stability the foundation, costs of children in the tax system for 2O years. Nine million people invested in ISAsWe need a step-change in workplace learning© le 's, ree "i "a The infrastructure of the future includes fast, more investment not less and, as affordable, On average, UK households have benefited byin their first year. To encourage more saving, we- particularly in small and medium-sized firms. J ' J ah, Qaotefficient and affordable communication -: will maintain the £7, OOO contribution limit forWe are determined to develop a three-way4a arrte j ' isa}telecommunications, the internet and
-_ thenext Parliament. We will help pensioners: partnership to bring this about. Currentvs aml rFI! ‘‘ae broadcasting. That requires the best
-_:~~ the Pension Credit will match private saving witharrangements have secured increasedi, rtcompetitive environment, effective regulation itrSSSgovernment funds, and pensioners will noparticipation, but not enough. Unions andi l -‘iand continued public and private investment
’ila_ longer be penalised because of their thrift (Seeemployers have a key role - but we also need toI. ~~-in the technologies of the future.
Petyei7. a‘Amodern welfare state’). To boost the savingsmotivate individual employees. Where both sides\A ‘digital divide’ would hurt business as well
* hs, oeSe, ae 3-: habit, we will create a new Savings Gateway forof industry in a sector agree, we will help set upspin --Jas individuals: universal access is vital to is ‘oie - ae.-a--iirpeople on lower incomes where their savingsa statutory framework for training. We will boosteffective markets. We will put all government lice Pane, aIwill be matched by the government. the efforts of trade unions to raise skill levels by "“°sting inbusiness... frstclass engineeringservices online by 2OO5, to improve access to l<n wedagiving statutory backing to union learninghigh tech as well as small business investment. _ services and spur business online. We will
+tea,:4The productivity challengerepresentatives and supporting the UnionThe Myners report has identified weaknesseswork to ensure that broadband, which allows
F7Staying better offLearning Fund. Government has a wide-rangingin our venture capital market, undermining long- _ fast internet access, is accessible in all parts
I". re"airole to play and is seeking to develop a trainingterm investment and economic dynamism. of the country.
ie ia -. jTo raise living standards, our ambition istax credit. We will look to business and unionsWe will act on its recommendations, includingEnglish is the language of the internet. We erE 4_- Ae meINT7 5hto raise our productivity faster than ourto come forward with proposals on how they can __ the abolition of the minimum fundinghave the best TV in the world. The next challenge
_ _m-siacompetitors and to ensure our goods andcontribute to meeting the nation’s training goals. I requirement and reforms to pension fundis to open up the learning opportunities and
Aheoolle‘4j_ i services are competitive in world markets. Everyone has a responsibility to help deliver amanagement, and review progress in two years. enjoyment offered by digital TV and the internet aoWe Labour has four priorities: high-skill, high-productivity economy. When people have worked hard, they wantto every household. We are committed to. ai te H: 5 eelre.«hyInnovationtheir money to go as far as possible. making the switchover from analogue to digital a wit ‘ eee4 ” a: ai wee 5 l. Investment in skills and innovationScience and technology are the basis ofCompetition policy has already helped cutsignals as soon as conditions for access and ire Pepe ey eee a...; ee ee ee ee ISkillsnew products and industries, both vital tocash-machine charges and new car prices. cost have been met.
SS Sa i set Cipante Bhs ge MER ate CPR ee a Sele Weare passionate about giving every child theproductivity growth. Since l997 extraWe will extend our fair and robust competitionThe governance of this fast-changing industry fap aga a be are bd eas es ce Sh aie Pies ealchance of a decent education. But we are equallyinvestment of £l.5 billion over three yearsregime by giving more independence to theis out of date. We will merge the five separate
More security and support for families with Labour: lower household bills, smaller mortgages and tax and benefit reform to help childrendetermined to offer learning opportunities tohas given science a fresh start, and a newcompetition authorities. We will toughen theregulators into one, to create the world’s most targeted tax cuts on our priorities.£59O a year from personal tax and benefitadults. Our ambition is for everyone to have thestream of university funding has helped createlaws on rogue traders, unfair terms incompetitive and advanced regulatory system.
Our aim is to put more wealth in the hands of I measures introduced since l997. During thisopportunity to train, in a partnership ofnew links between scientific breakthroughscontracts, and loan sharks. We believe in the value and necessity of public more people. That is why we will keep mortgage Parliament, living standards have risen byemployers, employees and government, eachand new products. In the labour market, minimum standards for -_ service broadcasting and have committed to rates as low as possible, ensure competitionten per cent for a single earner family ongiving time and/or money to raise standards ofBut we need to invest more to be at thepeople at work offer dignity and self-esteem. major funding increases for the BBC and to keeps down household bills, support savingsaverage earnings. To help those who work and skills in the UK. Our first priority is to help thecutting edge of science -in biotechnology and Regulation should be introduced, where it issupporting a publicly owned Channel 4 and S4C.
and share ownership, and create a new Childsave, we will extend the lOp tax band. We willestimated seven million adults who lack basicgenome research. We propose an R&D taxnecessary, in a light-touch way. We will cutback Ofcomwill ensure a level playing field, benefiting
Trust Fund for every child at birth to invest forcontinue to tackle tax avoidance. literacy and numeracy skills, with 75O, OOOcredit to promote business investment inthe red tape associated with regulation, examine consumers in terms of choice, price and quality, when they reach adulthood. We will not raise the basic or top rates ofpeople achieving basic skill levels by 2OO4. research. We will work for a European patentopportunities to put time limits on regulations, in particular through promoting competition.
There are no guarantees in an integratedincome tax in the next Parliament. We renewWe will: system by the end of this year to simplify thederegulate by secondary legislation, and offerTransport world economy. But we showed during the Asian _ our pledge not to extend VAT to food, children’s + ensure that job seekers get the benefit of aprocess of bringing ideas to market. Thehelp to small firms. Astrong economy needs good transport. Yet our economic crisis how to steer a course of stability clothes, books, newspapers and publicbasic skills test, as well as incentives and£235 billion a year, and growing, globalOver l5O, OOO small businesses have beeninheritance was massive under-investment, with in turbulent times. We will continue to work attransport fares. obligations to take courses to tackle literacymarket for green technology gives realset up since l997. We will develop the SmallBritish Rail broken into over a hundred international level to minimise global economicand/or numeracy problemsopportunity to British industry to benefit fromBusiness Service as an advocate for smallprivatised pieces, and bus services in decline.
lOturbulence, and to protect Britain if it occurs. a shift to low carbon technologies. We willbusiness in government and a servant of smallLabour’s priority is to improve and expandllao)railway and road travel. Our ten-year TransportFaft2OO3. We also intend the local post office toin terms of jobs, investment and trade. So, into strengthen partnership at work, which canao)
&Plan, supported by all the key players, matcheswt 4 i Iif ie fbecome an invaluable resource for access toprinciple, we are in favour of joininga successful foster employee commitment and help at a time&. large resources with major reform. £l8O billion_aFifa i I‘Hlgovernment information. There willbe increased - single currency. But, in practice, the fiveof industrial change. We have established the.
>of investment, split between railways, roadsand I~~. ee; i L + eaej ' Iincentives for people to take over andeconomic tests we have set out must be metPartnership Fund and want to expand it.>
2local transport and delivered in partnership with a oe\Fi 4, if I ot I: modernise post offices. Business customers, before the government would recommend entryInformation and consultation need to be2 the private sector, offers real hope to motoristsimin[I{: Le ay i Lrepresenting by far the majority of the Postto the single currency. An assessment of theappropriate to national traditions, with timely and passengers alike.‘oeri pod:4 if i oe E HF i iOffice’s turnover, want a full range of express, tests will be carried out early in the nextdiscussion of problems. When large-scale
Rail: Passenger numbers have risen by l7 peree.: BE -LELE Eo. olf reiV) te ia”parcels and logistics services. We have giventhe - Parliament. If the government and Parliamentredundancies are being considered, there is an cent since l997, and freight increased by 22it f ieI. 7ef ‘pee { fPost Office greater commercial freedom in therecommend entry, the British people will haveespecially strong case for consultation. The per cent. But recent crises have proved these“TEL, LLaLe liek odipublic sector. It needs to be able to gain anthe final say in a referendum. government is reviewing the effectiveness of need for urgent investment and strong: PeI; ie al FF, I Fo F oeadvantage in the new postal market and becomeSo the choice is between a Conservativethe Uk’s current arrangements for information regulation. With Labour, £6O billion will be spentiFrie: aan}. a -* rafa leading force in domestic and internationalParty which will deny the people of Britain theand consultation - works councils in larger firms on upgrading the rail network, with the majority_--: FiiI if [ ue] ZIre -< cpostal services through alliances and jointchance to join, even if itis in our nationaloperating across Europe as well as consultation of rolling stock replaced. Five hundred newi BeIventures. We want to help the Post Office keepinterest to do so - and the Labour Party whichon large-scale redundancies. We will implement carriages are already in use, another 3, OOOa-lse ’up with the best in a fast-changing market. says that, if it is in our national economicthe findings of our review in this area. We support ordered. We plan to expand capacity to boost}al\jiEF i" rr fata! F; TEnergyinterest, the decision should be made by theconciliation in the workplace to avoid resort to passenger levels by 5O per cent, and freight by4Ia aNaLabour is committed to a secure, diverse andBritish people in a referendum. litigation. We will examine reforms that promote more. Safer train protection systems are nowae. ey: ILt r. oe Irasustainable supply of energy at competitiveefficiency and fairness.
being installed and will be extended following-: ae);“Whore I eeprices. We have brought full competition to theNo one left behindWomen still suffer an l8 per cent pay gap
Lord Cullen’s report into rail safety.-2la Eeafpogas and electricity markets. Coal and nuclear compared to men. We are committed to tackling
The Strategic Rail Authority (SRA) has been‘.*-is i]energy currently play important roles in ensuringthe causes of this inequality. We will work with set up to provide strong, strategic direction. aiieJ EE; ia “Idiversity in our sources of electricity generation. _ Britain is better off than in l997 - but ouremployers and employees to develop effective
Train companies will get longer franchises inserihaicce secaar: be IWe are putting an obligation on electricityambition is to widen the winners’ circle soproposals, building on good practice and the return for higher investment and improvedeee ez"eee- aacompanies to deliver ten per cent of the UK'smore people share in the benefits of economic -_ sound business case, in both the private and services. The SRA will lead the expansion ofeeesquads nhegaeanaaetied[aelectricity from renewable sources by 2OlO, growth. In ‘A modern welfare state’ we set out -_ public sectors.
the network, using public-private partnershipsJere cee Meer ee ean; aeawith a doubling of combined heat and power. the route to full employment. We will develop career services for all. We aim
(PPPs). Railtrack is being reformed to focus onPie “a ena as a et ey « eee; iWe will consider setting further targets forfor a ten per cent cut in death and major injuries the operation of existing track and signalling. Os aa ao nn aarenewables, with particular focus on offshoreFair and flexible workat work by 2OlO and will clarify responsibility,
The Rail Regulator, with strengthenedpowers, © aepe eet ateawind, solar and biomass technologies, We are proud of our commitment to combine a -_ improve enforcement and toughen penalties for will ensure the delivery of higher standards, phates 7 Ss eettie mae carat Iles r\supported by a £lOO million fund. It will backdynamic economy with fair standards in theoffences. We are also committed to working increased safety and increased investmentbyeen aeup the Climate Change Levy, which includeswith managers and employees to reduce the the company. Supertram schemes have eased congestion in Manchester (above), Birmingham, Croydon, Sheffield and Nottingham, with plans under wayagreements to improve efficiency in energy-problems of bullying and violence in the
London will benefit from new trains andin three more citiesintensive sectors, and the new Carbon Trust, Eworkplace. As a major employer, our ambition is reduced overcrowding on its commuter services. _ the money into better transport services. NewIntegrated transportwhich will recycle £lOO million to accelerate thei]5 El'to improve the quality of work for our employees
We support plans to build a new East-Westroad safety schemes will mean more schoolGood transport systems offer choice acrosstakeup of cost-effective, low-carbonix iFhelping recruitment and retention.
Cross-rail tunnel and to extend the East London _ bus services and traffic-free Home Zones where _ transport modes. Transport Direct - a phonetechnologies. We will support research intoeet,¥ de 4it
Line. We have pledged increased, long-termpeople can walk safely, and children playand internet system designed to plan journeysclean coal technology and investigate its5 cy id rd i-¥ TeProsperity for every region investment in the Tube to underpin a public-without danger, to help cut the number of child -_and sell tickets - will put transport services atcommercial possibilities. We will double theosRegions private partnership to upgrade Tuberoad deaths and serious injuries by5O percent -_ people’s fingertips. Walking and cycling will beexpenditure on energy efficiency. Fuel povertyMedien +a___ Balanced and sustainable growth depends on infrastructure, with operations remaining inthe by 2OlO. encouraged in thousands of local transportblights lives: our aim is that by 2OlO noapea every region developing its capacity to the full.
public sector. Our agreement with the LondonRoad tax is being cut on smaller, cleaner carsschemes. Inland waterways are being revitalisedvulnerable household in the UK need risk ill-\FEieSitting back and leaving regional problems to
Mayor and Transport Commissioner offers the and duty reduced on greener fuels. Tax incentives and we will take forward the recommendationshealth due to a cold home. a7i... the marketis not acceptable. The causes of best chance in a generation to upgrade the Tube. _ are creating acleaner lorry fleet while the roadof the enquiry into the Marchioness disaster. BNFL is an important employer and majorei#: t4 disparities within and between regions must be
Supertrams will transform transportin ourbig haulage industry will benefit from steepInternational links are also vital. Plans forexporter. The government insists it maintainsFigs eT&laddressed. The new regional economic policy cities, with 25 new light rail or tram schemes. reductions in Vehicle Excise Duty to among theaviation and airports over the next 3O years willthe highest health, safety and environmentall: e- * ~-must be based on boosting regional capacity for
Services have been introduced or expanded inlowest in Europe. We will also ensure that hauliers be produced next year. Merchant ships arestandards. We are examining the scopeae b at hyJ-- innovation, enterprise and skill development,
Manchester, Birmingham, Croydon, Sheffield, from overseas pay their fair share towards thereturning to the British flag. We will completefor turning the company into a public-privateget ited) 7* ogcF 2modernising regional infrastructure and
Nottingham, Tyne and Wear with plans under way _ cost of our roads. Smarter driving will bethe high-speed Channel Tunnel Rail Link. partnership. n& cae ieon fae:. improving university/industry links. This is why for supertrams in Leeds, Portsmouth and Bristol. I encouraged by new highway communicationsMajor national infrastructure projects, suchai: aE," - Regional Development Agencies (RDAs) have
+ Roads: The Transport Plan allocates £6O billion - technology. We are also working with the motoras Heathrow Terminal 5, raise vital issues. We4. Europe and the wider worldFink":3 been set up and why they now have extra money to road improvement. Motorways will beindustry on safer, more fuel-efficient vehicles. will continue to modernise the planning systemLabour will be engaged and influential, fightingUnemployment down: young people benefiting from Labour's NewDeal ~~ and new freedoms.
upgraded; a hundred new bypasses will reduce Buses: are vital to local journeys. With Labour, and introduce new fast-track procedures forfor the British national interest, as we set outin -_ workplace. Labour has put right historic wrongs. We will work in partnership with local people accidents and pollution. But environmentally25, OOO new buses are already in operation. Bymajor projects of national significance.‘Britain strong in the world’. We will supportEvery employee now has the right to four weeks’ _to ensure that all regions and communities damaging road schemes have been scrapped; 2OO6, almost the whole national bus fleet willbe - The Post Office and postal servicesBritish Trade International, which gives business _ paid holiday; trade unions have the right tobuild on their own strengths. Our task is to all new roads must now be strictly appraised for renewed. Lower concessionary fareshavebeen We are committed to high-quality, universaldirect access to UK posts abroad, and maintain _ recognition where a majority of the workforceanticipate change, handle restructuring and maximum benefits and minimum environmental _ introduced for over five million older and disabled _ postal services, and a dynamic Post Officethe Uk’s position as the location of choicewant it; part-time workers have proper rights. enable businesses to move into high-skill, high damage. Our trunk roads are the safest intravellers. Park and ride schemes are increasing, which can thrive in a world of technologicalwithin Europe for multinational business. Our objective has been to promote fairnessvalue-added product markets. Labour’s Job
Europe and we aim to reduce serious roadand over lOO towns now have bus serviceschange and increased competitive pressure. Labour’s position on the single currency was -_ consistent with the competitive position of British - Transition Service will provide an intensive and casualties by a further 4O per cent over tenlinked to train stations, with cutprice fares. Bus Labour is working with the banks to offer a newset out by the Chancellor in October l997 andbusiness. That will continue to be our position. personalised response to large-scale years. £8.4 billion is now being invested in local _ partnerships between local authorities anduniversal banking service. This will allow allreiterated by the Prime Minister in FebruaryWe have reformed the labour market to builda - redundancies, helping people secure work or authority schemes in England. We have givenprivate bus companies will improve passengerbenefit and pension recipients to receive theirl999. We have made it clear that, providedthe durable and fair basis for constructive employee acquire new skills. The JTS will focus its work local authorities the freedom to choose to usenumbers and service quality. Nationally we willpayments, at no charge, in full at the post officeeconomic conditions are met, membership ofa __ relations. As we learn from the reforms, we will I onnew Employment Action Plans drawn up by l2charges to reduce traffic - but we insist they put work to improve inter-city coach services. after the switch to Automated Credit Transfer insuccessful Euro would bring benefits to Britain keep their effectiveness under review. We want _ local economic partners. l3zOur commitment is to use the £l.2 billion rising - people buying and selling homes through a newbusiness advice, better marketing, smallae a eatlandscapes and wildlife. Planning, transportz
&to £l.7 billion a year now pledged to RDAs tosellers’ pack, through grants for low-incomeslaughterhouses and restructuring of theand energy policy all make a difference. We&. promote business start-ups, strengthen linkshomeowners, and help for key workers in high-industry. We have minimised many regulatoryfeeshave also designated the first new national.
>between business and universities, forexample cost areas. We will honour our commitment toburdens and improved the way food safety, f. parks since l948 and brought consensus>
2through university innovation centres and thetackle homelessness. We will continue toenvironmental and animal health regulations: Eto a large increase in access to open2
~establishment of a Centre for Manufacturingpromote housing choice, with reforms toare implemented. n: countryside. We will press ahead with an
Excellence in every region to help firms develop. leasehold and commonhold law, a licensingBut British agriculture will only thrive in thecs eeal£8 billion programme for water companies
They will develop venture capital funds to boost - scheme for houses in multiple occupation, andlonger term through a further, radical‘oe Meiners Tals -areto clean up rivers and minimise damage from wealth-creating capacity. new powers for council tenants. We will developreorientation of the Common Agricultural Policy, iess~~ waste. The dangers of coastal and inland
The Conservatives are so obsessed with theamodern basis for land registration to make(CAP), away from distorting Europe-wideTe TS ~_ flooding are now widely appreciated, and we market and so out of touch with what goes onconveyancing faster and cheaper. We will alsoproduction subsidies towards more national‘aeare committed to investment in preventative beyond Westminster that they even want toexamine the ways in which tenants canbe helped __ responsibility for domestic farming, sag; solutions, including more sensitive use of scrap RDAs - and with them the vital jobs, inward -_ to gain an equity stake in the value of theirhome. - environmental and rural development priorities.4lagricultural land. We have increased the investment and prosperity that they bring. Labour is committed to reducing by one thirdCAP reform is now more possible; Labour’snumber of protected nature sites. We have the backlog of sub-standard housing by 2OO4, engagement with the EU gives us the best7: also initiated important steps to improve
Urban renewalwith all social housing brought up to a decentchance of making it happen.4 Welanimal welfare in Britain, and argued
Eighty per cent of people live in urban andinner- - standard by 2OlO. We will seek to reduce theWe have begun the process of change with ourasuccessfully for higher welfare standards for city Britain. We are ambitious for Britain’s urban -_ use of costly bed-and-breakfast accommodation. _ farming strategy and our seven-year, £3 billionoeaoe tSbattery hens and pigs across the EU.
areas: we want to make them better places toWe propose additional investment of £l.8 billion Rural Development Plans for England, Scotland, it eRAN ee eae live and better places to setup abusiness. The -_ over the next three years. Some local authorities I Wales and Northern Ireland. Labour will expandroe! a& aaty aes ee Pit; Leadership for the future
New Deal for Communities, worth £l.9 billionwill continue to provide high-quality councilthis programme so farming can become more(ee acai eertateLabour is committed to support our countryside over three years, and the £9OO millionhousing. We are supporting the transfer ofdiverse and responsive to consumers, andWa iiepe oa lis. zeeI and the people who live and work in it. We are
Neighbourhood Renewal Fund (see ‘A modern2OO, OOO dwellings per year, where tenantsproduce in a way that sustains and improvesae aLe I2 cae ss ig gdcommitted to create a new department to lead welfare state’), as well as our reforms to localagree, to social landlords like housingthe environment. We have already increasedat -i‘ }a: ciansarenewal in rural areas - a Department for governance (see ‘Strong and safeassociations, and new arms-length councilpayments for organic conversion fromeeSa oe ae toe r. at: Rural Affairs.
communities’) will drive forward progress. housing companies. We will also help lO, OOO£O.5 million to £l8 million, and will increasefj val7 2smbt a: werd Pay. Independent and wide-ranging views are
Labour offers £l billion of tax cuts over thekey workers buy their own homes in high-costthem further. dieTM ahle ie ee a. essential to the development of strategic and next five years to increase capital investmentin _areas to tackle recruitment problems. We have set up an independent, open andodTeaalong-term policy. We will set up an independent urban areas, for new businesses and for newconsumer-focused Food Standards Agency toeree se -_, * M sabae " pe atlcommission to advise on how we create a housing. Labour will reform the planning system - Rural Britainensure that all food meets the highest standards. iLi hy.: malaPeat ot rs hae eesustainable, competitive and diverse farming to speed up decision-making, promote the most The recent outbreak of foot and mouth diseaseWe will argue for the extension of food labelling,. F gale, Pa Sea acice, (S26, and food sector within a thriving rural economy efficient use of land, and strike the righthas caused strain and distress in rural areas. to give consumers more choice. Geneticallyz a eta: argent 4: 4ros S oe which advances environmental, health and balance of environmental protection, saferLabour’s priorities have been clear: to eradicatemodified (GM) foods and crops have causedi. Si a Bestsae ripe ‘llanimal welfare goals.
communities and economic growth. We havethe disease as quickly and effectively asconcern despite stringent safety checks. ThereFRe RS eee ont y teneyTao a. a ae rey
__ possible, to compensate those directly affected, should be high standards of safety - regulation: a. otibs eee" aE§ Coalfield communities
So heaand to protect the wider economy. Asthe number - must be strict, to protect the environment andLabour is committed to protecting Britain’s landscapes and wildlifeLabour is committed to a ring-fenced £4OO
7 i; Fs ie - F:4 6l ~«of newcases falls significantly, and the clean-uppromote public health and consumer choice -and guest houses in England, and new trainingmillion package of help for Britain’s exmining if a wig } tee l‘yF fd of infected areas gathers pace, we are committedHow Labour makes you better off: but we must use science to establish the facts, I and New Deal opportunities. We will supportcommunities. This will support local regeneration, aml fe ris -_- Tyae oeto help the most affected regions with a recovery: the opportunities and the risks before takingwell-targeted promotion, regional programmesincluding support for new businesses. We will poy I 4 iplan including advice on sustainable restocking,. final decisions in an open way. linked to RDAs, and high-quality information via__ ensure that compensation due is paid quickly.. oei A organic conversion, and early retirement and+ by saving money on yourIt is also important to reform the Commonthe internet. Traditional tourist resorts faceWe will also honour our commitment to exminers.: outgoer schemes. We will conduct a scientificmortgage, through economicFisheries Policy to preserve fish stocks for the -_ special problems, so we have extended thesuffering industrial diseases. We have set aside:[ireview of how to prevent animal diseasestability and low interest ratesfuture. In the short term, Labour is providingassisted area map to include many seaside£4 billion to compensate those men who:,‘ - i i raoutbreaks from occurring in the future, and willmore than £6O million in structural funds over _ resorts and have negotiated an extension to the -_ suffered from lung disease and vibration white peei. introduce tough rules to back this up. But we- by targeted tax cuts forthe next three years to help the industry, European Union regeneration funding so thatfinger after working in Britain’s mining industry fea a:__mustalso learn some of the wider lessons. families and pensionersincluding a new decommissioning schemeseaside towns throughout the country can start and the widows who nursed them.
5.&. TM; vg~Agriculture and fishingwhile also tackling the problem of ‘quota-hoppers’. _ rebuilding their economy.
AFie~ Since the Second World War the economy of+ by improving living standardsEconomic renewalRural lifeBritain led the first industrial
Ni eccore poateere."tural areas has undergone massive change. through action to tackle Britain’sThe economic hub of a rural area is often aLabour is pledged to a rural services standardrevolution. Other countries got ahead pT CLieatiosstral “<... About two per cent of the national workforce arechecitetthriving market town. That is why Labour isto set out specifically what rural people canin the second industrial revolution
Urban renewal is at the heart of the planning systemnow employed in agriculture. But the industry isproductivity gapcommitting an extra £lOO million of public and expect from 2l public service providers - withvasero:
put urban renewal at the heart of the planningparticularly important because of the links withI. private funding over the next three years forthe annual auditing and commitments to serviceNow our ambition Is for Brital nto system and set a target of 6O per cent of newfood production, our landscape and our~ by extending jobs andrenewal of market towns. RDAs willbe charged improvement. The rural school closuresucceed in the third industrial house building to be on brownfield land orenvironment. Labour’s aim is to promoteopportunity to every partwith renewal of rural as well as urban areas. programme has been ended; 3, OOO new, revolution - enhancing knowledge, provided through the conversion of existingeconomic renewal with a sustainable futureof Britain, through regionalWe will support village life with rate relief foraffordable homes a year are on the way; a£3O I Speeding up communication and buildings. Two Millennium Villages have setfor farming, strengthened communities andsupport and a revitalisedpubs, garages and shops, as well as farmersmillion police programme will help cut ruraldeveloping the talents of all the high standards in design. We will designatesustainable land use. infrastructurewho diversify part of their activity into othercrime; £239 million over three years has beenBritish people.
more in other parts of the country and continueShort-term pressures need to be met. Sinceenterprises. set aside for rural transport services; and the to raise standards of urban design, with athe early l99Os, sectors of farming have been- by offering a minimum wageTourism is a vital, growing industry for Britain, I Post Office is now obliged to prevent closure of quality mark to tackle cowboy builders. hard hit by BSE, the weakness of the Euro andof £4.2O and an Employmentwith l.8 million employees, and links to therural post offices except in unavoidable
Housingfalling world commodity prices. Labour hasTax Creditmuseums, arts and heritage that people want to circumstances, with £27O million to help
Lower interest rates enable more people to ownprovided £l.35 billion in short-term relief forenjoy. Quality is our platform - which is why weachieve this and recruit sub-postmasters.
l4their own homes. Labour will make it easier forfarmers, including aid for diversification, farmnow have a unified grading scheme for hotelsLabour is determined to protect Britain’sl5: oounThe whole country depends on high-quality public services.
5O per cent of young people entering ~~ We have a ten-year vision for Britain’s public services: record eeoe, higher education, as we raiseimprovement to match record investment, so they deliver high:+ IIstandards in secondary schools.;.
taioFjstandards to all the people, all the time, wherever they live.
F4iMaximum waiting time of three
(; Beeees i imonths for any stage of treatment, Since l997 there has been investment with reform. Thanks to.,&Saas -fact higheuatty treatment toc at committed public servants, we have shown that rapid progress
-im:-the point of use. is possible and have begun to break the fatalism that says public
-; Lias\services are always second class. Now is the time to move
II::,: lyIforward. Economic stability makes more investment possible.,.*Ioeieee I~ Every secondary school with aLabour will put education and healthcare first. We promise reform i BEEdistinct ethos, mission andcentre -__ tq match. We will decentralise power within a clear framework of iu %.. of excellencenational standards to increase the quality and diversity of public
‘a 2. I'i+ Recruit an extra lO, OOO teachersservices and meet the challenge of rising expectations.
-4¥ FE¢.’I~ More power to frontline staff withIn education, we offer step-change in secondary schools to
-'aoe o ower 75 per cont ornug ‘Match the vast improvements in primary schools already
7spending controlled by Primary Careachieved. Every school will have a clear mission, with more
FilF‘’°Truststeachers, new types of school, new opportunities for children ii, caeae_ 2mA: and education tailored to fufil their potential. By 2OlO, we want ie Be+“jny‘~ More health service workers - 2O, OOO gq majority of Britain’s young people entering higher education.
r\: a¥more nurses, and at least lO, OOO
¥E*,; Mes Minis iYn.5more GPs and consultantsIn health, we will recruit 2O, OOO extra nurses and at least
@am. *a “ie, a‘+ Free access to national museumslO, OOO extra doctors. Our ten-year goal is a healthier nation,
’leeei, &iIand gallerieswith fast, high-quality treatment meeting rising expectations
-_ba ay, and demographic and technological challenges. Doctors and;7ee aenurses will be in the driving seat of reform.
Jior i;{>ieeeThe job of government is also about ensuring that the enjoyment, ae--a aeIexcitement and inspiration of arts and sport come alive for ageveryone. In all our public services, the key is to devolve and
“iE: decentralise power to give freedom to frontline staff who perform
-ikwell, and to change things where there are problems. Services eeBeste aneed to be highly responsive to the demands of users. Where the aePeaequality is not improving quickly enough, alternative providers heteems: should be brought in. Where private-sector providers can support; gaiaSi“aena aapublic endeavour, we should use them. A ‘spirit of enterprise’
- aoa eeit yi a aSHT 4should apply as much to public service as to business. Labour’s ambition for public services is simple: in real terms -- and we are pledged to raise itto -_ betrayal; but every parent rightly wants farlbest possible education, with appropriate we want excellent services for all. Our challenge 5.3 per cent by 2OO3O4. Investment inmore. We will provide primary pupils with}support, whether mainstream or special
2is to reverse decades of denigration and under- _ buildings and equipment has trebled. Duringwider opportunities to learn sports, musicalIschooling most suits their needs.2
2investment. The citizen - the patient, the pupil, the next Parliament, we will again increase theinstruments and a foreign language. Ios: Schools in the toughest areas, and the2 ztheir needs and aspirations - must be central. share of national income for education. II+>, teachers who work in them, need specialz
We will work with frontline staff to deliver aSecondary schools! Il)Ps isupport. We will expand the Excellence in Cities
8revival of our public services that is every bitas - Under-fivesTransforming secondary education is the critical: L4iprogramme for urban secondary schools, with8
S. profound as the changes to the private sectorin The early years of a child’s life are vital. Thatis I challenge of the next decade. We reject a return"Iextra help for the weakest schools, learningS.
gthe l98Os. why we are doubling investment in early yearsto the llplus. The principles of inclusion and. I: mentors and inschool units to help manageg
In our first term, national action was vitalto education. There is now a free nursery placeequality of opportunity remain central to ouraia“ae “Apupil behaviour. Where LEAs cannot effectively tackle crises of funding and quality. Government available for every four-year-old. Our newcommitment to liberate the potential of everyLink, support school improvement, alternative must take national responsibility forinvestment I Foundation Stage provides a distinct phase ofchild. But, on their own, they are not enough to. provision will be made. For schools facing and for setting a clear national framework. Now __ learning appropriate for the early years. guarantee high standards. Eaeexceptional pressures, for example very high we need to move on, empowering frontlineBy 2OO4 every three-year-old will be entitledStandards have risen in the past four years,--aKeeae” ‘pupil turnover, we will provide additional the proposals andstaff. Each service needs the right structureto a free nursery place in the private, voluntary -_ particularly among pupils in less advantagedce or a HS, *: T « nefi asupport, including significant reductions in the statistics in thisand incentives at local level - decentralisationor statutory sector. OfSTED will help drive upareas. Strong school leadership and betteraaaaaa:%size of teaching groups where appropriate.
chapter refer toof power with strong incentives for highstandards. Children with special educationalteaching have turned around 7OO failing;. eo): ry
England; reform.:: ig. aoe..7 programmes forperformance. Frontline staff are advocates forneeds will have those needs identified earlier. schools. But the challenge ahead is immense.“a Te ilTeachers
Scotland and Walescitizens, and ambassadors for their services. We will continue to provide services whichToo many pupils fall back and become;-: aa~ “‘-_Nothing in education is more important than
Se eee cnMotivated by an ethos of service, they must beintegrate early years education with childcare. disillusioned in the first two years of secondarySor aren: having good teachers. We have made teaching manifestos. supported to carry through change."By 2OO4 we will have lOO Early Excellenceschool. Just half of l6year-olds currently gainPg etae%, ’a far more attractive career, through better pay,
Centres as beacons of good practice providing good school-leaving qualifications, and levelssil -_ a ait ee *.%ae: better incentives to train including training; we:. of drop-out remain too high. aeal‘-: Pa ae IThe dramatic advances at primary level meanImoroves provision foraited children as Labour nurtures special talents/Iae. J. apupils will increasingly arrive at secondarywhile developing a centre of excellence -- andare connected to the internet. Labour isri,
Education remains Labour’s top priority.-_ “ 4school demanding the best. We will radicallytheir rates of improvement outstrip the national © committed to spend £l.8 billion over six years*I
Excellence for the many, not just the few is ourSe amodernise comprehensive schools. average. Having trebled their number sinceon equipping our schools for the information: Faletk driving passion. Our goal is to develop educationi7il997, we have pledged to expand theirage. We will pioneer Curriculum Online to..
to harness the individual talents of every pupil. aIn future every school must have: numbers to at least l,5OO by 2OO6, onthe way -_ ensure materials are available to pupils inq i
Since l997 rising standards have been! ay x.~The right leadershipto making specialist status available to allschool and at home. We are committed to_achieved through major new investment andmis i7~ _ Headteachers must have the freedom andschools ready for it. We will encourage morecontinue to extend access to IT for pupils andae. ke significant reforms: l7, OOO schools have had\- "li _ fal resources necessary to run their schoolschurch and other faith-sponsored schools, teachers, including the possibility of a nationalth oe I q vital repairs or refurbishment; 2O, OOO schoolsaI eeeffectively. We have improved pay and trainingwhere parents wish it. We will establish moreleasing scheme to make top-quality hardware“l Cia are now connected to the internet; there areiie igifor headteachers and delegated more funding toCity Academies, and promote greater innovation available at very low prices.- nearly half a million fewer primary pupils in'4 aschools. Where they demonstrate success, wein the supply of new schools with local: j classes of more than 3O; over l5O, OOOAarea i~. will further extend their freedom to manage theirconsultation. We will allow greater involvement The right support teachers are set to receive a £2, OOO pay riseischools effectively. We will reduce the regulatoryin schools by outside organisations with aGood schools also depend on parents and the“4 above the usual annual increase; every schooliburden on all schools. serious contribution to make to raisinglocal community. We will continue to ensure that “ © * ‘ is getting additional grants of up to £llO, OOONursery places available for all three-year-olds by 2OO4High standards in the core curriculumstandards. We will extend provision for giftedheadteachers have the powers they need toGetting a head start... every child needs good IT skills paid direct; and there are ll, OOO morecare and education for children from O5; We will modernise the secondary curriculumchildren as we nurture children’s specialtackle disruption and unacceptable behaviour in __ salaries and loan write-offs, more recognition teachers and over 44, OOO more support staffwe will set up 5OO Sure Start Centres into promote higher standards and bettertalents. As part of our reform of the vital further schools. Local education authorities will focus and improved support. The General Teaching and classroom assistants. disadvantaged areas to support children’sprogression from school and college toeducation sector, we will encourage theon supporting school improvement, especially Council and National College for School
Our partnership with teachers has achieved early development; and we will provide an extra __ university or work-based training. All pupilsdevelopment of free-standing sixth-formweak and failing schools, and deliveringLeadership are both now up and running.
what OfSTED calls a ‘transformation’ in primary lOO, OOO places offering wraparound careshould reach the age of l4 fully competent inacolleges. Schools with sixth forms will beservices that cannot be provided by individualWe want teaching to be a career of choice for school standards, thanks to smaller infant class __ linked to early education. broad range of subjects. Effective teaching is theguaranteed their funding for pupils in real terms, - schools. We will ensure better training andthe best graduates and attractive to people sizes and major reform in the teaching ofkey. We will develop the literacy and numeracyprovided numbers are maintained. We aresupport for school governors. making career changes. We will continue to invest literacy and numeracy skills. Our task nowis to Primary schoolsstrategies in secondary schools with the rightcommitted to expand Educational MaintenanceSchools should be used more effectively asmore in the profession and improve conditions achieve a similar transformation in secondaryPrimary school teachers have achievedbalance of targets and flexibility, particularly forAllowances so they cover 3O per cent of theassets for the whole community, including forfor teachers. High status, better salaries and education, liberating the particular talent ofexcellent results. In l997 barely half of llyear- pupils not up to standard in the basics. We willcountry, and build upon them on the basis ofchildcare and community learning. We will pilotproper professional support are all essential.
every child. Our pledge to parents is clear: olds were up to standard in English and maths - set demanding targets for high achievement bythe experience. Pupils will be given greater“extended hours schools’ to develop thisWe are conducting a strategic review of teacher children should be on track to achieve theirtests. The figures are now 75 per cent and 72the large majority of l4year-old pupils in English, opportunities through the promotion ofresource. We will build on the success of more -_ workload and the right balance between best, or receiving extra expert help tocatchup. percent respectively, well on the way to meeting -_ maths, science and IT tests - the passport topartnerships between schools. We will buildthan 4O study centres based in leading football -_ teaching and administration, central direction our targets of 8O per cent in English and75per future success. We will promote more effectiveon the partnerships established between theclubs by extending community involvement toand local discretion. We will build on its findings
Investmentcent in maths by 2OO2. The lowest-scoring Local pathways beyond l4, including high-qualitystate and private sectors. other sports. Over time we want to develop safe _ significantly to improve support for teachers in
Money alone cannot guarantee a good education, Education Authorities (LEAs) are now achieving _ vocational routes that build on the newplaces for children to play outside school hours _ the classroom and in administrative tasks, so but extra investment is indispensable tobetter results than the national average in l996. vocational GCSEs and Alevels. We will ensureBetter infrastructureand every pupil to have access to a summerthey can concentrate on their job. We will:
achieving our ambitions. We pledge a furtherBut Labour will not be satisfied until everythere is an apprenticeship place for every youngWe will invest nearly £8 billion in school buildings + school programme. An Academy for Talented -- recruit lO, OOO extra teachers and improve the step-change in investment in return for afurther child leaves primary school with the basic skills person who reaches the required standard. and equipment over the next three years, Youth will be established in partnership with aadult: pupil ratio step-change in standards. they need. We are setting targets foran85 per I Amission to achieveincluding the construction of 65O new orleading university to pioneer summer and other - support teachers in the classroom by employing
In l997 Labour promised to increase thecent success rate for llyear-olds in EnglishWe want every secondary school to developcompletely refurbished schools. IThas enormous dedicated provision for those with specialmore adults to help them share of national income devoted to education. and maths, and will provide further intensivea distinct ethos, mission and centre ofpotential to raise standards, anditis vitalthat talents. We have significantly improved support - - invest in rapid promotion and rewards for
Over this Parliament, we have increased it from support for teachers to meet them. excellence. Specialist schools offer the fullevery child leaves school able to make use ofand provision for children with special needs or -_ classroom excellence l84.7 per cent to 5 per cent- £54O extra per pupilPrimary education without the basics is anational curriculum to the whole ability rangethe new technologies. Today, nearly allschools -_ disabilities. They should have access to the- boost recruitment and retention packages forl9teachers, particularly in high-cost areas andHealthaLiconditions of the staff employed in these aschools facing exceptional challengesschemes. We will seek ways in which, within thea o- create new routes into teaching, includingframework of PFl management, support staffo
2‘trainto-teach’ courses accredited as part ofFor over 5O years the NHS has been part andcould remain part of the NHS team.2 zundergraduate degrees and a stronger trainingparcel of what it means to be British. If you fall ill, Z mission for outstanding schoolsthe NHS is there. Its foundations - tax-basedphat
$+ further improve inservice training opportunities - funding and care according to need- remain asEevebal] iB for teachersvalid today as ever.] hy Ii]s.
8- develop school achievement awards that rewardThe NHS employs one million dedicated people.+. se ee Iti i8 staff in 7, OOO fast-improving schools a yearBut it needs far-reaching reform to redesign itsInif
- subsidise new PCs for teachers so that theyservices around the needs of patients. Labour’sEIa; I: i have direct access to the latest technology. ten-year NHS Plan is our strategy for ensuring fast, l convenient, high-quality care in all parts of theSa_. hey FIi
Higher education - a world leadercountry. We will implement it through the nextiVkme
Higher education brings on average 2O percent - Parliament and, if elected, beyond. Reform willilla “a 4 ig I higher earnings and a 5O per cent lower chance __bedriven through primary care trusts (PCTs) aslER i I of unemployment. It is time for an historicpower and resources are decentralised toI, Y aj I commitment to open higher education to half of -_ frontline staff. Iii} I all young people before they are 3O, combinedIn l997, waiting lists were at record levels and FiF IeS; ig I with increased investment to maintainrising, hospital building had ground to a halt, and<a tha]- Fda I academic standards. the number of nurses working in the NHS hadaMeAbove: More flexible working hours for NHS staff
In l997 we inherited a system where thefallen. Today, waiting lists are down by overr-_iw: fepy Lett: A bright future for frontline staff and patients number of qualified people able to go to university lOO, OOO and waiting times are falling. There are-_aarFaImproving health was capped. Today, the numbers are risingand l7, OOO more nurses, over 6,5OO more doctors,:) IlOur job is not just to improve the nation’s health universities have the funds to expand, withnew -_ and over 9, OOO more therapists, scientists andaebiFrservice. It is to improve the nation’s health.
two-year foundation degrees to offer studentstechnicians working for patients. The biggest-ever7 I5 cael Ln2ayDeaths from cancer and heart disease are too the option of a vocationally relevant, high-quality hospital building programme is under way. NHSoresii ogai)sfhigh. There has been a growing health gap qualification as a way into skilled work or further - Direct, the 24hour nurse helpline, is availableobetween rich and poor. Beyond other study. Over the next three years, we willacross the country. Eye tests for people who arei il J #Jf_7commitments to combat child poverty and poor continue to expand student numbers, takingus 6O and over are now free.-eeoihousing, we will tackle the long-standing causes towards our 5O per cent target. But there is a lot more to do. We are committedza-"of ill-health and health inequality by:
We will maintain university entry standardsto investment and reform.. i. a4ef la- making the fight against cancer, heart disease while intensifying efforts to extend the hugeWith Labour, in just four years the NHS will haveita"tSpy"¥FoFand stroke the top priority for investment and advantages that a university education confersgrown by a third. Spending on the health servicewillCmiAe areform, with earmarked extra funding of £l to able young people from all backgrounds. is now rising by an average of over six per centailoia albillion by 2OO4. The number of cardiologists will
University summer schools, masterclasses and __ year in real terms - the biggest sustainedrete"increase by around half and cancer specialists mentoring support will be offered to potentialincrease in its history and double that underiere‘4_izby nearly a third by 2OO5 compared to l999students from disadvantaged areas through athe Conservatives. Provided that as a country wei"[ PalI2OOO. Waiting times for cancer treatment will be new Excellence Challenge programme, backedmaintain economic stability, we will, if elected, iyieoicut. Our ambition is to prevent 3OO, OOO up by £l9O million of funding. be able to sustain significant funding increasesaefavoidable deaths over the next decade
We will not introduce ‘topup’ fees and havethroughout the next Parliament. So over time weehe"a- tough targets to close the health gap to cut legislated to prevent them. Since l997 we have _ will bring UK health spending up to the EU average. Ldeaths in poorer communities and among increased university funding by more than a. spoorer children improving mental health billion pounds a year over the Parliament - andThe fundamentals of careservices, and anew emphasis on prevention, invested considerably more in research. OurThat money will help us get the basics right. with more screening services including for new system of university finance ensures thatBy 2OO5 there will be lO, OOO more doctors andaconditions like sickle cell disease, cystic
5O per cent of students pay no tuition fees at2O, OOO more nurses, with ward sisters inifibrosis and newborn hearing problems all, that no parents pay more than under the old -_- charge of ward budgets. Matrons will make surel- offering the world’s best smoking cessation system, and that students pay back loansthat hospital food is good and wards are clean, I“yservices to help the seven in ten smokers who progressively when they are earning. We willwith power to stop payments to contractors whojij 7 Isay they want to give up ensure that the funding system continues tofail to keep hospitals up to scratch.*}re+ giving children aged four to six in nursery and promote access and excellence.‘Nightingale’ wards for older people and mixedad5"primary schools a free piece of fruit every
We will strengthen research and teachingsex wards will be abolished, and mental healthéi 'school day - the biggest boost to child nutrition excellence. It is vital that our world-leadingwards will be modernised. There will be 7, OOO"- rtImy,"asince free school milk was introduced in l946.
universities are able to compete with the bestextra beds in hospitals and in intermediateitiesWe remain committed to our bill - blocked by internationally. We will also support world-class care. And we will build lOO new hospitaloe Par aejithe Tories - to ban tobacco advertising and research and the development of public-private © developments by 2OlO and 5OO one-stop“Le aeeece: sponsorship.
partnerships. We are determined to ensureprimary care centres, with over 3, OOO GPcoh a IrSe4 that our universities have the freedom andpremises modernised by 2OO4. We areaReforming the NHS incentives to meet our ambitions for them. investing an extra £7 billion of capitalrae IAfThe NHS has to earn the confidence of each new
Reforms to the inspection system for teaching investment into the health service. We haveIgeneration. It has to change the way it works if it will slash red tape for higher performingsaid that Private Finance Initiative (PFI) should'is to meet today’s challenges and provide fast
2Odepartments. not be delivered at the expense of the pay andand modern services. With Labour, by 2OO42lpatients will be able to see a GP within 48 hours. Patients will be represented on trust boards andguarantee to staff at all levels opportunities forOlympics and Paralympics thrilled everyone. view. We will then enable Parliament to reach awill create new specialist arts schools and city
By the end of 2OO5 we will cut maximum waitinghave more information on local services’ quality. training and career development. HealthcareLabour is committed to a radical extension ofconclusion on this issue. If the issue continues to academies to offer specialist education to the
2times for outpatient appointments from six monthsassistants, porters, cooks and cleaners will besporting opportunities and facilities. Sportis abe blocked we will look at how the disagreementmost talented young people.2
2to three months, and for inpatients from l8 months - Power devolvedoffered an individual learning account worthgood health policy, a good crime reduction policy, can be resolved. We have no intention whatsoeverPublic money devoted to the arts should be2 zto six months by expanding staff numbers andTo achieve this vision there will be clear national £3OO a year to develop their careers. We willa good way of building communities. of placing restrictions on the sports of anglingspent on excellent art, not bureaucracy. The Artsz reforming how care is delivered. Major conditions like standards but greater decentralisation to front- I examine the potential for sabbaticals to helpWe pledge a sports entitlement for all children, I and shooting. Council is undergoing substantial reform - creating
8cancer and heart disease will have priority, withline services and to the staff who run them. GPs, consultant nurses and consultants keepgiving them access to at least two hours a week ofa simpler structure which gives more power to the8
S. all patients treated according to clinical urgency. Locally agreed personal medical servicestheir skills up to date. sport in or after school. Thanks toourbanonthe Artsregions, cuts bureaucratic costs further, and whichS.
gWe will give patients more choice. We haveschemes will be extended. By 2OO4 all localThere will be new systems to learn from whenenforced sale of playing fields andacommitment Thirty million people enjoy arts activities each year. can deliver a better service to individual artists andg restored the right of family doctors to referhealthcare will be organised by primary carethings go wrong, a core education curriculumof nearly £l billion to new sports facilities andThe arts are crucial to national life, with a hugearts organisations. We will ensure that our arts patients to the hospital that is right forthem. Now __ trusts (PCTs) run by frontline doctors andfor all health professionals and reforms tol, OOO school sports coordinators, all childrenimportance for the creative and tourist industries. funding system backs excellence, giving artists we will redesign the system around the needs ofnurses. Together with the new care trusts, modernise the way health professions arewill be offered coaching and competitive games. Yet the Conservatives introduced charges for ourand arts organisations the long-term stability they patients. Same day tests and diagnosis willcombining health and social services, PCTs will regulated. We will take action to protect NHSChildren with talent need more investment: wenational museums and galleries, cut the artsneed to become world leaders.
become the norm. By extending the use of NHS. control 75 per cent of NHS funding. With morestaff from violence and abuse, and reform thehave pledged to fund 2OO specialist sportsbudget, and reduced support for arts education.
Direct and increasing the numbers of dentists, power for PCTs we will cut the number of health _ clinical negligence system. colleges. We will maintain the elite funding we putSince l997 that has changed. NationalCreative industries patients will get easier access to NHS dentistryauthorities by two-thirds and devolve to theThis is a vision worth fighting for. It will takein place for individual athletics, with a first-classmuseums are already free for children andThe creative industries are a vital engine of wherever they live. Specially built surgical units- remainder the functions of NHS Regionaltime to achieve, but this is the mostathletics stadium for the World Athleticsour economy, providing jobs for over one managed by the NHS or the private sector -willOffices. We will use the savings of £lOO million I comprehensive plan ever put before the BritishChampionships in 2OO5 and a new stadium inmillion people. The National Endowment for guarantee shorter waiting times. We will usea year for investment in frontline services. people to improve the state of the nation’sManchester for next year’s Commonwealth Games. Science, Technology and the Arts (NESTA) spare capacity in private-sector hospitals, Hospitals and other local services will havehealth and our health service. It will deliver anWe are committed to sell the Tote to a racinghas been set up to back our most talented treating NHS patients free of charge, where high greater control over their own affairs and access NHS to be proud of. trust to allow it to compete commercially, withyoung people.
standards and value for money are guaranteed. to a £5OO million performance fund, whileall long-term profits invested in the sport. Wetrs aNCreative entrepreneurs need seed funding,
It would be wrong to push people into paying forconsistently failing NHS hospitals will be takenare committed to finding ways to support the"cheap accommodation near other similar their operations. That is why we reject theover by successful NHS hospitals. amateur sports clubs to which 5.6 millionicompanies, and advice on how to develop approach of the Conservatives, which would lead Appointments to trust boards will no longer bepeople now belong. ILet: i pis their talent into a business. To meet those to this outcome. made by ministers but by an independent panel. The arts and sports are key to our quality of life. The House of Commons elected in l997 made7 ~~ I - - os needs, we now plan to provide startup advice,
By the end of 2OO5 every hospital appointmentThey matter for their own sake. Millions makeclear its wish to ban fox-hunting. The House ofel: Sa in.“4 _ services and funding for new businesses.
will be booked for the convenience of the patient, NHS stafftheir living out of their creativity. Government canLords took a different view (andreformhasbeen [esphe ET keVenture capital will be available through RDAs, making it easier for patients and theirGP tochoose _None of these ambitions will be possibleand must make sure the opportunities are there. blocked). Such issues are rightly a matter forais iand a creative industries champion will be the hospital and consultant that best suits theirwithout major investment in the skill, workingBut, for the last 2O years, under-investment, free vote and we will give the new House ofappointed in every Business Link.
needs. From next year, ifan operationis cancelled - conditions and working practices of all NHSmisplaced priorities, and lack of organisationCommons an early opportunity to express itsRe be } 4 FyilI on the day of surgery for non-clinical reasons, the staff. There will be extra pay too in high-costheld back access and excellence. F\aallLottery hospital will have to offer another binding dateareas, with pressure relieved through expandedSince l997 this has begun to change. WeHow Labour helps young people: Cultural heritage... an extra £lO million a year has been allotted toUnder the Conservatives, many communities within 28 days, or fund the patient’s treatment at staff numbers, reformed working practices and _ have started to invest and to reform the system. regional galleries, such as the Lowry in Salfordmissed out on their fair share of lottery money.
the time and hospital of the patient’s choice. investment in training. Investment in theatre develops the film andpensioners. Labour is committed to reform theThe number of grants to community groups
By modernising all maternity units, increasingEvery NHS employer will offer more flexibletelevision stars of tomorrow; investment in sporty by raising standards andVAT system to ensure they will be made free forhas trebled with Labour. Yet there are still the number of midwives and giving womenworking hours for staff and especially nurses. will produce the Olympic and Paralympic medalinvesting more in education, everyone from December. By 2OO4, arts funding © communities which have received a greater choice over childbirth, we will ensure that - Childcare provision will be improved and we willwinners of 2Ol2. from nursery schools towill be 6O per cent above its l997 level in realdisproportionately small share of lottery women receive the highest quality maternity care. offer targeted subsidies for childcare for NHSCulture and sport should not be seen asadult learningterms. An extra £25 million a year will go tofunding. We will ensure a fairer deal for them.
There will be tough new standards for care ofstaff. The pay system will be reformed to make it -_ peripheral issues - they are vital to our identityregional theatre, increasing the number andLabour has reshaped the lottery to match children, the elderly and people with conditionsfairer. As set out in the NHS Plan, there will beand enjoyment as a country. We are pledged to- by giving the majority of youngquality of productions for audiences in England. people’s priorities. Money goes for revenue as like diabetes, kidney failure, multiple sclerosis, new contracts for GPs and hospital consultants, the investment necessary to expand accessadults the opportunity toWe have invested in our orchestras, and put anwell as capital. The New Opportunities Fund
Parkinson’s disease and epilepsy. coupled to extra money. We will examine the case -_ and excellence together in culture and sport, Bn PoaAextra £lO million a year into developing our(NOF) directs help to education, health and the.;,_a: rnge: study in higher education.:.°
We will further tackle the ‘lottery of care’aswe -_ for a public-private partnership witha commercial building on excellence in film and broadcasting. regional museums and galleries. We haveenvironment - after-school clubs, vital cancerdirect local health authorities and trusts to fundmortgage lender to make home ownership more’maintained our commitment to the nation’sbeating equipment, local green spaces.
drugs and treatments recommended by theaffordable for nurses and other staff. Sport- by tackling youthheritage and to its historic buildings, and we willWe backed going ahead with the Dome as an
National Institute for Clinical Excellence (NICE). We will set up a University of the NHS toThe performance of British athletes at the Sydneyunemployment, with thecontinue our drive to put architectural quality atopportunity to showcase British talent and give
Genetic services will be extended in the NHS SONew Deal made permanentthe heart of the design of new public buildings. people a good day out in millennium year.
that more patients enjoy the benefit of the latest [I )heEducation is the bedrock of an artistic society. Despite being enjoyed by more than six million advances in testing and treatment; but we willltyTs,2 de- by opportunities to train asWe are once again giving children thevisitors, the Dome did not fulfil expectations and ban by law human cloning, and implement aa“%you work, through modernopportunity to learn music, and we will ensurewe have learned the lessons, good and bad, moratorium on the use of genetic tests for4aeilohapprenticeships and the rightthe opportunity is available to all. New creativefrom it. But the development of the Dome has insurance, following a recommendation of theoiee-fto time off to studypartnerships - linking schools with artists andbeen the catalyst for unlocking the value of the
Human Genetics Commission. We will continueif: "F l“! qtle hy, Iarts organisations particularly in disadvantaged North Greenwich peninsula and regenerating to examine demographic and technological& 4 opI#4: omee Iby expanding sports facilitiesareas - will offer children the chance to developlocal communities.
challenges as they affect the NHS.£I a7Ia eei I roer "in schools and in the communityartistic and creative talents. We will build on the
Patients will have more say, as in the NHS Plan. t4jpilot projects. We have made the largest-everWe need a revolution in the status coniaihgley medcaldeegvngaceact he I mate we te ee cer- by cleaning up theinvestors N computerising ibrar: all willbe standards and focus of our public containing key medical data giving access to theirpoco aa Spins au pee vin,. (ey ae ee me! oe eee:: online by 2OO2, with guaranteed standards toservices. Labour is prepared to make medical records. Older people, people withPai agers! Peeters Sale ed Sebieeen rae ee aeee esenvironment, with support formeet users’ needs. ICES. ris prep disablities and their carers willbe able to decide A uma a En ves l7S ct orseicere CUgreen technologies and globalFrom 2OO2, Culture Ondine will offerchildrenand te investment in staff and services ~ which services they want, withthechoiceofhavng pete ieee edaction to tackle climate changeadults alike tailored access to our nationaland we are ready to match investment
22cash given to them directly by local councils. Sporting chance... Labour is committed to a sports entitlement for all childrencollections and cultural activity over the internet. We with reform.23As society changes, so the welfare state must change. Wennnj
Sustain a higher percentage of people have a ten-year vision for an active welfare state: to promote__ ful employment inevery tegien. work for those who can, security for those who cannot, andIoS) Seeig: Sa I alk Sestl rewards for those who save, volunteer, learn or train. i5Lata gy eo me fier fy oye
Child poverty halved and pensioner“aI7ee r Sea re poverty tackled, as we extendSince l997, we have cut the costs of unemployment, savinghe-inert opportunity for all children and£4 billion last year. As a result, we have been able to spendSeth2ie Ae security for all pensioners. more on tackling poverty and raising family support within aEb: ffeS*: wa social security budget that has grown, in Labour’s first term,!; Taal o4
- An ‘Employment First’ interviewfor at the lowest rate since l948. he, ie.: aa th< everyone coming on to benefits4. a %, “aatPAI,
- Expanded support for children through Employment is not just the foundation of affordable welfare, it. l palsa::
tax and benefit reformis the best anti-poverty, anti-crime and pro-family policy yetd7Fr# ae invented. After years of mass unemployment, full employment.. yoipRa, Pree: z uali
- Extend and increase paid maternity _ is now on the agenda. Our ten-year goal is to sustain a higherte, _STad leave and introduce paid paternitypercentage of people in work than ever before. With more thana hety_,.:
leaveone million more people in work than in l997, and a milliones; aei ‘
- New pension credit for lower: andvacancies in the economy, we need to extend the New Deal,4qSeid - an middle-income pensioners, and thenot abolish it as the Conservatives propose.4FTr:
Winter Fuel Payment retainedaf esa) PyQ
We judge our society by how we treat the young and the old. Ini‘:;
+ £9OO million Neighbourhood Renewal this Parliament, over one million children have been taken outrms, FH:
Fund for jobs, education and crime;.:. oo. I:
preventionof poverty; our ten-year goal is to halve child poverty, ending itqdhsayaa of in a generation. We will transform support for children to“SS' i I eB: I achieve it. sy uJa gaF
For those in retirement, security depends on partnershipa I¥ EE between state and funded provision. We promise that, within:; i two years, no pensioner need live on less than £lOO per week, Ail‘.‘).
increased annually in line with earnings growth. On top of that,- -:«,; we will reward pensioners who save. ateI: a
Government cannot achieve social inclusion for people, but itoe.:“h,:
can help them achieve it for themselves, by transferring powerea and opportunity to local communities. That is our promise. BenlI,
24: i_:>FWe will offer greater flexibility to personalchildcare nationwide, allowing all parents totake-home pay too. For people with families, we - Housing benefitFor the first time, Britain will have a seamless>
5ull employment,"...:,,3
3advisers and encourage greater engagement ofcombine home and work, confidentpromise to match your effort with supportAlthough the number of people claiming housingsystem of child support, whether parents are in3 gemployers, with IT training for all New Dealers. in the childcare they have chosen. We willthrough the tax system. For those on lowincomes __ benefit is currently falling, it remains the mainor out of work, paid to the main carer. g
<With Labour, the welfare state helps people into © Employment Zones include funding geared tohelp with the costs of childcare through thewithout children we will create an Employmentway in which accommodation is madeOur aim is to make the goal of ending child<
&work, makes work pay, supports them at work, results and public-private partnership. On theChildcare Tax Credit - and will look to extend itTax Credit to boost their earnings, tackle poverty affordable. Our first priority has been to workpoverty in Britain a political litmus test for any&
©and demands responsibilities in return. Ourbasis of the evidence we will consider theirto people looking after children with disabilities, and improve work incentives. with local authorities to drive up administrativepolitical party running for office. The task for the© aambition is full employmentin every region-good -__ extension to new areas and new claimantand shift workers. We will support thestandards and tackle fraud and error. But wenext Parliament is to help another milliona sfor the economy and good for social justice. groups. We will build on the Action Teams forcommitment of community and voluntaryPeople with disabilitiesmust continue to reform it. So we will simplifychildren out of poverty. s
The New Deal has already helped to cut long- I Jobs model, which is targeting 4O of the mostgroups to build up a diverse range of childcare -Our ambition is to enable people with disabilities I housing benefit and its administration, term youth unemployment by 75 per cent -severely disadvantaged areas, to tackle thefrom Early Excellence Centres to neighbourhoodto play a full part in the community. The Disability distinguishing between people of working ageAssets
28O, OOO young people have been helped intoemployment gap for ethnic minorities, andnurseries and informal care (see ‘World-classRights Commission now ensures full civil rights I and pensioners, reforming provision for private Our active welfare state has so far been based work. Long-term unemployment is down by over - devote £45 million to provide stepping stonespublic services’). for people with disabilities; we have legislatedtenants, and examining the case for longeron work, finance and services. It is now time to
6O per cent. The claimant count is the lowest for into employment for the hardest to employ. Many older workers now want to continue inso those with special needs or disabilities have I awards. We will spread best practice inadd a fourth pillar to the welfare statea
25 years.-aequal access to education. We are nowadministration. In the longer term, we will build
But too many people are still denied thea:-committed to extending basic rights andon our restructuring of rents to ensure that for opportunity to work. A million people remain: siopportunities, as indicated in our response topeople of working age, housing benefit as wellPs unemployed; lOO, OOO lone parents have comeeothe Disability Rights Taskforce. as the Working Families Tax Credit strengthen" off income support since l997, but our target isr 4We are requiring different kinds of publicwork incentives.
to raise the current 5O per cent employment rate' i? ietransport to be made accessible, and introducing to 7O per cent. Many people with disabilities outconcessionary bus fares for the first time, for’_- a of work say they would like to work. Older people, pewig, fw; people with disabilities. _-. a with a wealth of talent and experience, are ai4ailAyThe New Deal for Disabled People pioneersi irt resource we cannot afford to waste. aefl ah ae es,- iy a iy: new ways of helping people with disabilities into I Strong and stable family life offers the bestx
Labour has ended the days of low-grade jobeoA’oeffjobs. The opportunity to work is vital to civilpossible start to children. And marriage providesa+4 schemes. The New Deal leads to real jobs, aieeeBiaa Terights; we are testing how best to offer help with - astrong foundation for stable relationships. Thef ies*.
lower benefits bill and higher tax receipts. WeHc! iy“: éas ‘i it th irehabilitation and job retention. We will investgovernment supports marriage. But it has to do* ~~ now need to build on its success, extending it toAgtsriTo ie i aee nialan additional £4O million to help people withmore than that. It must support families, above allee Icae more people across the country.- Ff Pk, feathe ‘idrea eedisabilities into work, ensure that it isfamilies with children. Our vision of the tax and_ pamSei heeded
We also need to ensure that the barriers to‘“te ee Hi coe: Paworthwhile to try out a job and stay in work ifbenefits system for families with children is toiin eee nee work are pulled down by delivering on oura ge ee amt ©ge i a ld“they have high care costs, and improveprovide help for all families; to give most help atInvesting in the future... new babies to get our Child Trust Fund obligation to tackle discrimination so that all#i a SERREhe heiccrendassessment for equipment and services asthe time families need it most; and to give moreprogramme to extend to all children the.2po, Pe ee PeeT ee nmee. aj:
people can make the most of their talents.“afetapt aa a oe F “i si apeople move in and out of work. help to those families most in need. advantages that come from reaching adulthood senil esGu ED cb eepa WE eee a aiialdagWe will not use disability benefits to disguiseThe Conservatives stacked the tax systembacked by a financial nest-egg.
Making the New Deal a permanent dealiaemee I Meh, aunemployment - the Tory approach in theagainst families: over four million children livedNearly a third of individuals have no financial
The benefits system we inherited was,:‘ aan j a, ifl98Os. The number of people getting Incapacity -_in poverty; one in five children were growing upin _ savings or assets at all. People without assets fragmented, complex and contradictory. We arePb: iae o iyi. Benefit (IB) has fallen by ll per cent sincehouseholds without work; the average income of - are much more likely to have lower earnings and putting in place clear, consistent rules: thosesemen rt Pesan ii i ie 4ia f‘il997; but too many people are written off when -_ households with children had fallen to 3O perhigher unemployment, and are less likely to who can work should be in work or in contactoe A! ai. in fact they could, with support, work. cent below the level for those without children. _ start a business or enter higher education.
with the labour market. As unemployment falls, gsiaitao pea iiaWe will help break down the barriers that keepLabour has started to turn this round. We haveThe government already encourages people to we need further reform to help people into work.'oeBe ee7people with disabilities out of work. We willraised child benefit for the first child by over asave for a rainy day and save for a pension. We are
Labour will introduce a new principle of: F r ate cis“acontinue to modernise the operation of thequarter. The Working Families Tax Credit hasdetermined to extend the savings habit to more
“employment first’, with rights and responsibilitiesi‘SO a7benefits system so that, if people can work, wemeant a tax cut averaging £3l per week forpeople. But we are pledged also to use saving to balanced at every stage. The contract is simple:4Me. SHIRE sabe “iaehelp them to do so, and stop them slipping from -_ l. l million families. In 2OOlO2, an averagepromote opportunity for the next generation.
quality opportunities for real responsibility. SE ae: lal wi el qlfa aelack of work to inability to work. Around l8of nearly £5OO above l99798 levels will beAll newly born children will have an interest-
“Something for something’ is the foundation. ae7eler aemillion working days are lost each year due toinvested in every child in Britain. Personal taxbearing Child Trust Fund set up in their name
Labour is pledged to create a new WorkingSkills for Ife... a young catering student works towards a vocational qualificationwork-related illness - at a cost of over £l7and benefit changes have made families withwith an initial endowment from the government,
Age Agency, JobCentre Plus, merging the oldAll lone parents will be invited to employment -_ work full- or part-time. Yet one in three peoplebillion. Many people on Industrial Injurieschildren an average of £l, OOO a year better off. with more for poorer children. The endowment
Employment Service and Benefits Agency, andinterviews to help them seek employmentbetween 5O and state pension age is notBenefit are helped into work by combiningWe are pledged to go further - to eradicatewill be locked until the child reaches adulthood.
focusing on the key skill needs of areas of theopportunities. We will build on the lessons ofworking. To help them we will build on the Newsupport with effective services, and we wantchild poverty in a generation and halve it byWe will provide incentives for extended family country and sectors of the economy. Whoeverthe Choices programme, which offers help withDeal 5O+. To help bridge the divide betweento help as many of the rest as possible. But if2OlO. In the next Parliament we will make major and friends as well as parents to contribute to you are, wherever you live, you will get thelearning, work and childcare. Partners ofwork and retirement, we will examine ways topeople cannot work society has a duty to provide changes. The Children’s Tax Credit - the familythe fund. All the next generation will have the opportunities suited to your needs - from oneunemployed people with children, like thoseensure that people will be able to draw on theirsecurity for them. tax cut - is worth up to £52O a year for five million - backing of a real financial asset to invest in office, one adviser, one system. without children, will also be asked to interviews occupational pension and continue to work part-For people unable to take up paid work, wefamilies, with half a million families removedlearning, buying a home or setting up a business.
The New Deals for young people and olderto discuss their options. time for the same employer, phasing theirare committed to offer security. We havefrom paying tax altogether. It is paid until one workers will focus on numeracy, literacy, IT skillsParents need good-quality and affordableretirement without compromising their pension. increased support for children with parentsparent earns more than £4O, OOO per year. Caring for children and presentation. Where people are homelesschildcare if they are to have real choice aboutWe are exploring how to facilitate the transitionon income support by 8O per cent in real termsFrom 2OO3, the Integrated Child Credit willAsafe childhood is not just about financial or suffer drug or mental health problems we will -_ work. For the first time, Britain has a Nationalfrom work to positive voluntary activity. since l997. There is now a minimum incomebring together all existing income-relatedsecurity. It is also about care for children, offer specialist support. More than l4O, OOOChildcare Strategy - covering cost, provisionOur ambition of full employment is part of aguarantee of £l42 per week for people withpayments for children, providing most help toespecially the 58, OOO children in care. Society adults aged over 25 have been unemployedfor and quality. We have already created 3OO, OOOdeal: if you put in a fair day’s work, thedisabilities under 6O. Incapacity Benefit hasthe neediest children, building on theis failing these children: 7O per cent leave over l8 months. Labour will deliver moreextra childcare places. By 2OO4 our targetis to I government will ensure you are able to supportbeen extended to people disabled from afoundation of universal child benefit. With theschool without any GCSEs and too many have intensive and flexible help, with increasedhave childcare places for l.6 million children. yourself and your family. The minimum wage isyoung age. Disability Living Allowance hasbeen -_newsystem of child support, every family willbeen abused while in care.
responsibilities for claimants. Our vision is ambitious: safe and reliablethe foundation. But we offer a guarantee ofextended to three- and four-year-olds. We willreceive at least £l5 per week, and those mostLabour supports a national children’s rights
26continue to keep the system under review. in need £5O per week - over £2,5OO per year. director to act as a champion for children in27>need and we will consult on whether to develop’’single pensioner will have an income belowfrom their caring responsibilities. We are proudlAe LsEi. aeI“I>
3and extend the director's role. The Criminal £lOO per week and no pensioner couple anthat, with Labour, care by qualified nurses will be{a iea: ae iIa oe 4I p3 gRecords Bureau will help stop paedophilesincome below £l54 per week. Labourmade free to all, wherever it is received. OnepRBeaetg
<and others who are a danger to children fromIn l997 Labour made a clear commitment tointroduced the Winter Fuel Payment. Its level ishundred and fifty thousand more older peoplel5 PI Pe]ane iilim::-- I<
&working with them. From next year, all children’s - ensure pensioners share fairly in the risingset each year. Last winter it was raised to £2OO. will receive rehabilitation and convalescence; l oe IHs xeae& ohomes will, for the first time, be subject toprosperity of the nation. At this election, weFor next winter it will also be £2OO. through growing investment in the NHS and;; aTeeo
Egindependent spot checks. The level ofrepeat our commitment to pensioners - weWe will also do more to reward pensionerssocial services that the Tories refuse to match.“aa fi ee LrerEg
Gseducational attainment of children in care willhonour your lifetime of work by ensuring that you - _ who have saved. Pensioners who work and saveWe want to see carers given access to the cashioae“ae as4zi: s be significantly increased. Every child leavingshare fairly in the nation’s rising prosperity, andwill find, for the first time ever, the governmentand services appropriate to their service to their-* ae ie*AE eet 3 care will be guaranteed access to ajob, training are committed to tackling pensioner poverty. We -_ rewarding their saving. Pensioner couples withrelatives and the community. The Carers andiadiatae Hy a or education. will build a secure system on the foundationof an income up to £2OO per week and singleDisabled Children’s Act gives carers a right to anee metal
For many children in care, adoption offersthe basic state pension. pensioners with income up to £l35 per week willindependent assessment of their needs. We will‘i Fssecieat the best chance of success in life. We will makeAs aresult of Labour's policies, in thisbe rewarded for saving - the government addingexamine the development of a fund to help localPecata adoption faster and fairer. Children who needParliament spending on pensioners will beup to 6Op for each £l of savings income up to aauthorities produce tailored care packages toufue new families will be placed within l2 months£4.5 billion a year more in real terms than inmaximum of £23. In the process, we will abolishback up the results of these assessments. od by 2OO4. We aim to ensure that at least l, OOOl997. Of this, £2 billion is going to the poorestthe weekly means test for pensioners, along with~. i, rd more children a year are adopted, with improved __ third of pensioners. removing the unfair test of savings, which»’" post-adoption support for parents. Our first priority was to help those on lowestpenalises pensioners who have modest savings. " incomes: we have lifted the incomes of the l.7and whose thrift should be recognised._I
Family-friendly workingmillion poorest pensioners by at least £8OO aIt is also vital to have in place long-termSocial exclusion, affecting around ten per cent ofos* “a al-' “
For the majority of parents, time is precious. year, and for some couples by up to £l,4OO. pension reform. We support a fair balance ofthe population, living in fewer than l, OOO of the7:-- f.
Many employers offer excellent schemes forpublic and private provision. Occupational andmost deprived wards in Britain, damages livesgate: l7 oeca family-friendly working. But we want to gopersonal pensions, properly regulated, willand wrecks communities. Before l997, socialOne million children lifted out of poverty further - with government funding to helpcontinue to offer security for middle and highexclusion was ignored. Now we have a newis to cut rough sleeping to two-thirds of its l998 parents devote more time to their children Spr.: earners. We will continue discussions on annuityapproach - improving the quality of mainstreamlevel by 2OO2. Beyond then, we will maintain the early in life. We want government to promote» tereform to ensure tax rules do not unnecessarilyservices, preventing people falling between thedrive to keep the number as low as possible.
choice because, without our help, many peoplezphe 4restrict the development of annuity products andcracks, and reintegrating them into society ifTeenage pregnancy rates are fallingLabour’s objective is to get the right benefit are denied the choices that should be theirs.7- ae“markets. For low- to middle-income earners, things go wrong. We have targeted five priorities: Yet Britain has the highest rates in Europe. to the right people at the right time. We want
A flexible labour market must work to the benefit“, - stakeholder pensions cap costs, guaranteeHomelessnessLabour’s strategy tackles the causes of teenage _ those entitled to benefits to take up their rights of both employers and employees. TM value for money, offer flexibility, and drive downThe number of people living on the streets ispregnancy, provides mothers under l8 withto claim them. Fraud undermines confidence
Statutory maternity leave is currentlyi‘J. ifees across the board. And for the lowest paiddown by one third since l997. Labour’s targetaccess to supervised housing if they cannot live _in the welfare system, so we are committed to l8 weeks; we propose to increase it to sixrail i:7 oe iand carers, full-time parents and people withat home, and ensures that, if they do havereduce it.
months. Statutory maternity pay is paid at a“a‘I disabilities, the state second pension will top upHow Labour helps pensioners: children, teenagers get access to training, We have been prepared to be tough - flat rate of £6O a week; we propose to increase‘Jtheir pension contributions to give a decenteducation or work. By 2OO4 we are pledged topreventing fraud by tightening gateways, it to £lOO per week, as big an increase in the“aTa -pension in retirement to l8 million people.’’reduce teenage pregnancy by l5 per cent. sharpening sanctions on fraudsters, and now next two years as in the past 4O years. FathersToday’s pensioners have much to give to~ by boosting the basic stateTruancy and exclusionwith ‘two-strikes-and-you’reout’. We have saved currently have no legal right to paid time off onsociety. Labour’s NHS Plan offers £l.4 billionpension for a single pensionerLabour has a target of reducing truancy and£l billion in fraud and error over the course of the birth of a child; we propose to introduce itbaalof investment for older people to promote betterto £77 each week in 2OO3, exclusion by a third by 2OO2. The police arethe Parliament by tightening up the way we for two weeks, also paid at £lOO per week.- - ihealth and support independence. Pensioners£l23 for couplesconducting truancy sweeps; parents are nowadminister income support. The introduction of
We need to do more to help parents balance‘aalso need simple, accessible services that treatsubject to fines of up to £2,5OO; funds areAutomated Credit Transfer will save a further work and family. Many parents, especially‘ithem with dignity and promote independence.+ by retaining the Winter Fuelbeing targeted towards pupils at risk.£lOO million per year.
mothers, want to work reduced hours whenWe will build on Care Direct to provide a betterl6- to l8year-oldsLabour is committed to clear targets for fraud iia IF::: Payment, and free TV: O clear tal they do go back to work. We will work withintegration of health, housing, benefits andlilNearly ten per cent of l6- to l8year-olds arenot -_ reduction for each benefit, including a f:.: ooicences for over-75s...:
business and employees to combine flexiblesocial care for older people. This will be anin education, training or work. The newcommitment to halve the rate of fraud and error working with the needs of business. integrated ‘third age service’ to help older: Connexions service will bridge the gap, providing -_ in income support and Job Seeker’s Allowance
Security in retirement... state pensions to rise with Labourpeople and those who care for them.> by rewarding those who savea single adviser to ensure all young peopleby 2OO6, and to incorporate fraud prevention
Child Support AgencyPensioner households are on average £ll perwith the Pension Creditreceive clear advice on the transition to work. into the design of new policies on benefits and
Some families break up. Government’s role isweek better off than they were in l997; andover CarersNeighbourhood renewaltax credits. We are also committed to data to ensure that both parents retain responsibility three million pensioner households benefit from Not only are the large majority of people who+ by raising the MinimumOver the next three years Labour is pledged tosharing between government agencies and for the financial support of their childrenwhere _ free TV licences for those over-75s. require care older, but also the majority of carersIncome Guarantee to £lOOback reform, with £9OO million of investmentin -_ action to reduce to a minimum the number of they are able to do so. We have alwaysThe pensioners tax allowance means six outare older people. Labour will tackle the problemseach week (£l54 for couples)deprived neighbourhoods. We want local people ‘spare’ national insurance numbers that are a supported the principle underlying the work ofof ten pensioners pay no tax. We have halvedthe -_ faced by people requiring care and the problemsin 2OO3to lead renewal - a coalition of public, privategateway to fraud.
the Child Support Agency (CSA), but therate of tax they pay on savings income. We haveof carers themselves. and voluntary organisations specifying
Conservatives bungled its introduction. That ispledged to extend tax allowances further so thatThe national carers strategy is the first step,+ by tackling discriminationpriorities, engaging local effort. Local Strategic - Our welfare state is underpinned by why we have already legislated to reform theby 2OO3 no pensioner pays tax until theirincome - with information, support and care for carers: against over-5Os in healthPartnerships, which we have introduced to help clear valueswe help you to help
CSA and these improvements will come onreaches £l27 per week. Labour will spend £5OO million over the nextcare and in the workplacecoordinate public service improvement, will beyourself, we invest in children, we stream from 2OO2. A simple system will ensureWe now need to go further. With Labour, thethree years providing financial support forproperly inclusive of local people, involving themsupport our pensioners, we insist that a better deal for children, that fathers pay afair basic state pension will rise by 2OO3 to £77 a3OO, OOO carers through the benefits system,’’in decision-making. They will be backed byno community be written off. and we share, that mothers benefit from their doingso, week fora single pensioner and £l23 a weekand £255 million for social care services for> by boosting police numbersspecific funds to engage the local community. oey; and that tougher action is taken against parents _ for a pensioner couple. We guarantee that thecarers. More is being done for carers throughand cutting overall crime, andNearly £lOO million has been set aside forMINIMISE fraud and error, Our reforms who do not comply. Minimum Income Guarantee will be upratedincome support; carers will be better able tocrimes like burglary that affectbusiness start-ups, and we will create a new taxwill build a strong and inclusive society.
each year in line with earnings, throughout thecombine work and care; and 75, OOO moresenior citizens the mostcredit for community investment to create £l
28next Parliament. In 2OO3, this will mean nocarers each year are now able to take a breakbillion of investment in disadvantaged areas.29_--We all know the sort of Britain we want to live in - a Britain ewe tne Drgiaty ate ane cou tne where we can walk the streets safely and know our children are chanes oF persistent olveneer pend safe. We have a ten-year vision: a new social contract where caught and punished, as we modernise.
the criminal justice system. everyone has a stake based on equal rights, where they pay.“their dues by exercising responsibility in return, and where a!+“ye.
at heReformed local government withlocal communities shape their own futures.
Smtrhigher-quality services, as we adecentralise power. Overall crime is down ten per cent in Labour Britain, recorded
-crime down seven per cent, and police numbers are now rising.
Pi~. AE IaaAn extra 6, OOO police recruits raising Our strategy is clear and consistent - tough on crime and tough y4: ts, i&ga* police numbers to their highest everon the causes of crime.
l: raaa, level r, by‘a EiDouble the amount of assets seizedOur ten-year goal of reducing crime depends on reform of the a;+ from drug traffickers and other major Criminal justice system at every level, from police to courts to fa4:3lhelcriminalsprison - to put crime reduction centre stage. And, because, i‘I4crime is changing, crime fighting has to change too - to tackle is: iiIneteasee belied amneieealrepeat offending, drug-related crime and organised crime. We, a: eh aeno, J2sttendorsPare investing to raise police numbers to their highest level ever.
-ia+: Offenders must know they will be supervised in or out of prison;2+)Pi:-Abill of rights for victimsuntil they can prove they have gone straight.
-. i": tNew freedoms with new targets for Sate communities reclaim their streets; then they can shape
7- local government:: vgs
’-sirtheir own affairs. In the l9th century, local politics was the af myETmotor for economic and social change. Our purpose is simple:
7. aZto create a Britain that is democratic, decentralised and aefi! aldiverse, with decisions always taken as close to the people as ete: is consistent with efficiency and equity. Our ten-year goal is a
Pli aan a 7new settlement with local government - over finance, al-" oestructures and services..#“eae a i.
taySeeae. a ad Pe ceseraraesafo2Responsibility from alleke, 8a om ac ears, ae mDrugsinvolving domestic violence or fraud, thereis avictims. We now propose further action. First, g gsWinning the battle against crime(a ERM ye eanohiorege etOne of the biggest contemporary drivers ofstrong case for specialist courts and specialistvictims will be given the legal right to present their&
Pycrime is drugs. Access to effective treatmentis judges. We will also develop late sitting, seven-views on the impact of the crime to the court ando
SRecorded crime doubled under thel Sehatteessential. Prisoners are already subject todaya-week courts in high-crime areas toensure _ other criminal justice agencies before sentencingS gConservatives: burglary went up lO5 per cent, l Li--' Rra a, 4fo: 4 Fs: compulsory testing and offered treatmentthere is no delay in getting people through thedecisions. Second, prosecutors will be able tog
3car crime llO per cent, violent crime l82 peroka‘ Ean.<a[oadinn ake fewhere necessary, which has led toa 5O percent criminal justice system. We have establisheda _ challenge defence pleas in mitigation of theg
3cent. The number of offenders caught, os lItag: a ©aay escut in the number testing positive. Drug Testing Judicial Commissioner to scrutinise thecrime. Third, we will legislate for a Victims’ Bill3
2convicted and punished fell. The criminal justicecame Ti, -i)infies - ote Iand Treatment Orders ensure people punishedappointments process, and will take forwardof Rights to give support, protection, and rights2 system, especially for young offenders, was inaaal--oe- ae esin the community stay drug-free. reform on the basis of experience. to information and compensation to victims.
adisarray. Anti-social behaviour was unchecked. arh. ae I, We are pledged to raise spending on drugRules of evidencea
And investment was falling. flBoa ieFae oes a a es atreatment by 7O per cent by 2OO4. We will rollOur rules of evidence fail to trust the good::
The British Crime Survey shows crime downpoo peas paleo Ibaa cee alate Leout drug testing to cover offenders at everysense of judges and jurors. Recent case law has tenpercentin Labour's first two andahalfyears, I 9ibe-! eestage of the system. People in prison for drug: extended the admissibility of evidence of including a four per cent drop in violent crime. Sead pee-*; eSrelated offences will have to kick the habitprevious conduct. If there is any remainingLabour believes that Britain can be a model of a
Recorded crime is down seven per cent fromoe a es ESa-before they are free from supervision on thedoubt, we will consider legislation to reinforcemulticultural, multi-racial society. We have made l997, domestic burglary down 28 per cent, caraeeeees yeEbhoutside. Drug dealers will be required to register the judgment. Pending the findings of the Auldmajor legal change; now is the time to build the crime down 2O per cent. Investment in crimerages Dat'with the police after leaving prison. report, we see a strong case for a newinclusive society in tune with British values.
fighting is up. We have reversed the decliningWe will simplify the law on extradition to target presumption that would allow evidence ofOur commitment to protection for every trend in police numbers, reformed youth justice, organised crime including drug traffickers. Theprevious convictions where relevant. Currentlycitizen is expressed in the l998 Human Rights and supported every community to prevent crimeCriminal Assets Recovery Agency will targetonly the prosecution must disclose all expertAct. It ensures that British citizens are able to and anti-social behaviour. We have reduced bytheir ill-gotten gains. We will follow the moneyevidence and names of all witnesses. In theenforce rights in our own courts. Other legal seven weeks the time from arrest to sentence fortrail, through bureaux de change to offshorelight of the Auld report, we will consider whether - change was necessary too. The Race Relations persistent young offenders, and are on track toaccounts, to convict them, and remove their-:(Amendment) Act learns the legal lessons from meet our pledge to halve the time by May 2OO2. Surveillance strategy... extra crime-fighting investment is targeting community crimemoney and passports.---_pethe shocking death of Stephen Lawrence and
But we are not satisfied. Drug-related crime isrewarded for their skills, experience andstay straight or you will stay supervised or goOur ambition is to mobilise every7places a positive duty on all public bodies to amenace. Recorded violent crime has risen, commitment. We will promote cooperationback inside. The continued modernisation of theneighbourhood against drugs. We will thereforer: Fepromote equal opportunity. We abhor racism partly because more domestic and racialacross force boundaries for common servicesprobation, parole and prison services, so everyensure that crime-fighting partnerships,;‘~~ and shall continue to implement the violence is being reported. And new crimes arelike training. We are also committed to a newoffender gets punishment designedcovering every locality, get over £2OO millionxe 4: recommendations of the Macpherson report, being committed - fraud through the internet, independent police complaints commission. to minimise reoffending, will carry thisover the next three years to fight crime and drugs. wari ri 4 including the reform of the ‘double jeopardy’ law human trafficking. forward. We will build on our youth justice‘ifor murder. The repeal of Section 28 of the
The only way to reduce crime is by being tough __- Persistent offendingreforms to improve the standard of custodialA modern criminal justice systemi i] ¥7l988 Local Government Act was grossly oe proposals onon crime and tough on its causes. Government About lOO, OOO persistent offenders, mostlyaccommodation and offending programmesThe UK’s legal traditions are precious. But toooet l‘ I _ misrepresented as an attempt to use teaching crime relate tocan help families and communities preventyoung men, commit about half of all seriousfor l8- to 2Oyear-old offenders. much of our criminal law and the organisationam _-- to promote particular lifestyles. We will ensure
England and Wales. crime. But when people do commit crimes, wecrimes. We need a new approach to catch, of the courts are stuck in the past. Our#: fthat such teaching continues to be prohibited,
Se Seneed an effective criminal justice system able to convict, punish and rehabilitate more of them: Crime in the communityambition is to reequip the criminal justice- o_~ _ based on the provisions of the Learning and policy in Scotland. catch, punish and rehabilitate people.”- Youth offending teams will track up to 2,5OO ofBroken windows, graffiti and litter all send asystem to deliver justice for all -the victims, orSkills Act, while removing discrimination on the most persistent young offenders 24 hoursa __ signal about lawlessness. Labour supportsthe public and the defendant, with a short-term¥égrounds of sexual orientation.
Supporting the policeday, seven days a week. fines for anti-social behaviour and new powerstarget of lOO, OOO more crimes ending inaThe UK now has the most comprehensive
The foundation is our police force. Police- Every active offender will be on the DNAto tackle unruly behaviour and kerb crawlers. criminal brought to justice. Our White PaperPrimary school children learn about safetyanti-discrimination legislation in Europe. But an numbers started falling in l993. Ourinvestment database by 2OO4. Every local authority should have an anti-socialCriminal Justice: The Way Ahead set out ourthe defence should do so too. In addition, inclusive, tolerant, open society, where people in 2OOOOl increased the number of recruits by + Persistent offending should lead to increasedbehaviour unit. We will tackle alcohol-relatedinitial views on reform. The Auld enquiry willwitnesses should be able to refer to theirrise on their merits, depends on culture and an extra 3, OOO, boosting the number of officerspunishment. We will end the failed policy ofdisorder, with an overhaul of licensing laws, also make major recommendations. original statements in the witness box, as wellaction as well as law.
in training by 77 per cent over the previous year. -_ repeat financial penalties; where offendinggreater flexibility over opening times, andProsecutionas offer evidence by video-link. We now need to reduce the barriers - to
Now Labour pledges a further 6, OOO extracontinues, firmer measures will be taken. We will - tougher controls on rogue landlords. We willDespite an increase of 25 per cent since l997, Representationservices, opportunities, institutions - that still recruits. Labour’s pledge is that over the nextinvest over £2OO million over three years toalso streamline the system for removal ofwe have too few prosecutors. By 2OO4, LabourWe have created the Community Legal Servicehold people back. This applies in the public and three years annual funding for the police will rise I reduce reoffending by those in custody. untaxed and abandoned cars. pledges 3OO new prosecutors, includingand will extend it to 9O per cent of theprivate sectors. There are too few black and by £l.6 billion, to £9.3 billion. Sentences will combine time in prison and in theCrime fighting now starts in every communityspecialists in areas like serious and organisedpopulation by April 2OO2. We will continue toAsian staff in key public services and, in almost
We also need to create a more effectivecommunity, with proper supervision after release _ thanks to new statutory Crime and Disordercrime, paid on a level playing field with thepursue the principle of best value for the benefit -_all organisations, far too few in middle and police service. Basic command units are thefor exprisoners. In time, all offenders will havePartnerships. Our Safe Communities Fund willdefence. We will modernise and consolidate theof the taxpayer and criminal defendants in thesenior grades. This is why we now have targets heart of modern policing, and localtheir own plan for return to lawful life, startingin target hundreds of neighbourhoods with thewhole criminal law system to promote publicCriminal Defence Service. We will examinefor the diversity of central government and other commanders and senior detectives should becustody with drug treatment or literacy training. highest crime rates with extra crime-fightingconfidence and to speed up criminal proceedings. _ reforms of the tribunal system in the light of the public services.
properly trained and rewarded. Strong- New Review Courts will ensure that offendersinvestment. Domestic violence accounts for atLaw reform is necessary to make provisionsLeggatt Review. We will subject restrictiveVoluntary and community organisations are leadership, modern equipment and specialistwho breach the conditions of their sentence willleast a quarter of all violent crime, so Labour isagainst corporate manslaughter. practices in the legal professions to the closest - key to Labour’s vision for Britain. From large training and expertise are all essential. We willget extra community service, more intensivecommitted to expanding the safe hostel network. Courtsscrutiny to ensure both the professions andthe _ national charities to local community groups bring in new arrangements for the development -_ supervision or custody. Those who break theirCrime prevention requires that those most atThe current system, split between magistratescourts serve the wider public interest. and faith-based institutions, these sectors are a and appointment of chief officers. We willbail can expect to go straight into custody forthe _risk of falling into a life of crime - childrenand crown courts, needs reform. A unifiedvital and diverse part of national life. We have introduce a new national core curriculum forremainder of their remand period. excluded from school, teenagers leaving care -system, including lower or intermediate tiers of - Victims have rightschanged the tax rules to encourage individuals officers at every level. We will ensure that- To deal with the most dangerous offenders of all are given real help and opportunity. Thatcourt, offers simplicity and flexibility. LayIn l997, victims were the forgotten people inand businesses to give to charity, supported specialist detective expertise is built up using-those with a dangerous severe personalityincludes drugs education for every child atmagistrates as well as professional judges have __legal battles. That has begun to change. We have _initiatives to increase volunteering, involved outside experts where necessary. disorder - we will pass new legislation andprimary and secondary school, and youththeir place in the system. We will remove themore than doubled the funding for Victimvoluntary and community groups in the design
Labour will ensure more people see morecreate over 3OO more high-security prison andinclusion schemes in high-crime areas. We willwidely abused right of defendants alone toSupport, taken powers to protect vulnerableand delivery of key government programmes police in the community. We will discuss withhospital places. also take measures to tackle the problem ofdictate whether or not they should be tried inwitnesses in court, and prevented personallike Sure Start, and helped charities build up
32the police how those on the frontline might beOur proposals are based on a simple principle: child pornography on the internet. crown court. For specialist cases such as those _cross-examination by the defendant of rapetheir capacity to do their job even better.33®Labour will build on its Compact with theemployees. Newly hired workers are protectedof political representation will be sufficient.® svoluntary sector, as we develop more farby minimum standards at work. We will use aHowever, in other parts of the country there maySs
Sreaching partnerships for the delivery ofwide-ranging review of TUPE regulations tobe a stronger sense of regional identity andaS aservices and the renewal of our communities. Change comes from the bottom up as much asconsider whether unfair disparities are beingdesire for a regional political voice. a gWe will also build on our financial incentivesthe top down. For the last 5O years, governments created between these two groups of workers. In l997 we said that provision should beat_& gfor volunteering, by developing an effectivehave failed to respect this basic truth. We want to give successful local councils moremade for directly elected regional government_ Iete TFeg
3infrastructure to support voluntary work inLocal authorities are responsible for theleeway to meet local needs using a £4OO millionto go ahead in regions where people decided inrJcovn2 every community in Britain. We welcome theeffective delivery of over £9O billion of publicreward fund. We have piloted local public servicea referendum to support it and where-; contribution of churches and other faith-basedservices a year. The staff and councillors whoagreements to offer new investment and greaterpredominantly unitary local government is
°organisations as partners of local and centralwork for the community often have the hardestfinancial flexibility in return for higher performance. established. This remains our commitment.° government in community renewal. We willjobs and their expertise is areal resource when -_ We will extend this reform to all upper-tier councils.# use a successor to the Lambeth Group toit comes to achieving reform. The best of localWe will offer further flexibility for high-performanceThe nations of the UK look at government’s interface with faithgovernment is an inspiring example of whatauthorities, with reformed inspections and moreDevolution has strengthened the UK, preservingf communities. government can achieve. local discretion to encourage civic renewal. Wethe union on the basis of a fairer partnership. J
Labour’s ambition is a partnership of mutual __ consulted last year on a range of reforms aimed atThe nationalist lie has also been exposed: the
Immigrationrespect and mutual responsibility. We want toenabling councils to deliver key local services onUK is strong enough and flexible enough to
People from abroad make apositive contribution combine additional rights and resources withthe basis of transparent, stable and adequatedevolve power while retaining the benefits ofTowards peace in Northern Ireland... Tony Blair with David Trimble and Seamus Mallon to British society. As our economy changes andresponsibility and reform, working with councillors funding. These remain our aims. We will give newstaying together. five MPs is a woman. Labour increasedof representation and scrutiny.
expands, so our rules on immigration need toand officers to develop the structures, services -_ freedoms to local authorities to enable them toThe Scottish Parliament and the Welshwomen’s representation five-fold in the l997The government has introduced major reflect the need to meet skills shortages. Theand finance to help local communities. invest in local capital projects. Assembly have put power in the hands of localParliament through all-women shortlists. We are _ innovations in the electoral systems used in primary purpose rule, which split families and didThe job of local government is to provide theLabour believes that local quality of life issuespeople. In Scotland the Parliament has powercommitted, through legislation, to allow eachthe UK - for the devolved administrations, the nothing to stop abuse, has been ended. Arightof leadership to improve quality of life, and offer- from litter to parks - are vital issues, notover primary legislation. In Wales we will buildon _ party to make positive moves to increase theEuropean Parliament, and the London appeal for family visitors has been introduced. the citizen a seamless, one-stop service. Weperipheral. We will pilot home zones, redesigningthe already successful legislative partnershiprepresentation of women. Labour will continue Assembly. The Independent Commission on immigration rules will remain clear, firm and fair, have worked with local government to establish -_ local areas to enhance safety and the quality ofwith the Assembly, and continue to enactto modernise the procedures of the House ofthe Voting System made proposals for electoral and help ensure that those who come and workclear targets for standards of service; and tothe local neighbourhood. Local authoritiesspecific legislation for Wales, where appropriate. I Commons so it can effectively fulfil its functions - reform at Westminster. We will review the here continue to make a major contribution tooffer incentives for service improvement andshould have the incentive and means to improveThe UK Parliament makes the essentialexperience of the new systems and the Jenkins our economic and social life. innovation. Partnership with the voluntary and _ the local environment by recycling local fines intofinancial allocations to all devolved bodies. How Labour is tackling crime: report to assess whether changes might be private sectors is key. a local environment fund. English MPs make up 85 per cent of the UKmade to the electoral system for the House of
AsylumThe foundation of effective service delivery isOur ambition is the development of active, inParliament so there is no case for threatening- by increasing police funding byCommons. A referendum remains the right way
It is right that people fleeing persecution are able -_ best value in every service. Year on year, localtouch local government, serving the people. Wethe unity of the UK with an English Parliament or2O per cent over the next threeto agree any change for Westminster.
to make a new life as hard-working citizens inaauthorities and their staff will now work tosupport the introduction of elected mayors forthe denial of voting rights to Scottish, Welsh andyears, and taking policeWe are committed to completing House new country. Britain has along record of providing achieve improvement in services, matchingour cities, which is why every local council nowNorthern Ireland’s MPs at Westminster. numbers to record levelsof Lords reform, including removal of the ahome for such people, and it is important that. Northern Irelandremaining hereditary peers, to make it more we maintain this position. But asylum should not_‘eséWe have made working for peace in Northern- by targeting investment onrepresentative and democratic, while7 be an alternative route to immigration.."_\-> A: rsIreland a priority. The Good Friday Agreementpy targeting Investment omaintaining the House of Commons’ traditional
The UK is ninth per head of population among__ it>. lewas overwhelmingly supported by the people offighting crime in the highest-primacy. We have given our support to the
European nations for asylum applications. Theae, ir a 4Pill*iiNorthern Ireland and in the Republic of Ireland. risk areas and tough targetsreport and conclusions of the Wakeham key is to hear cases swiftly as well as fairly. Bya-teaYWhile it has not brought a perfect peace, andto reduce car crimes, Commission, and will seek to implement them cutting the decision time and increasing theLo--iwhile the peace process has not been smooth, burglaries and robberiesin the most effective way possible. Labour processing of claims to over lO, OOO a month, j“it has made life immeasurably better. supports modernisation of the House of Lords’
Labour has reduced the backlog we inherited.‘¥ 7, I‘4he" “7Northern Ireland now has its own Assembly+ by cracking down on localprocedures to improve its effectiveness.
We have tightened controls against traffickers,: and Executive. They have produced their firstdisorder and anti-socialWe will put the independent Appointments and introduced a civil penalty for lorry drivers‘aprogramme for government and first budget onbehaviour through localCommission on a statutory footing.
who bring in illegal immigrants. Anationalit, across-community basis. The security situationpartnerships and measures; support system has been introduced to relieve‘has been transformed. People can walk againto deal with the ‘yob culture’Whitehall a pressure on local authorities. Asylum seekerset: aon the streets of Belfast free from fear. TroopsOur civil service is world-renowned for its and their dependants whose claims are rejectedsi»no longer patrol in most of the province. And the.. independence. Labour is committed to will be removed from Britain with the aim ofi‘iinumber of murders has been drastically- by implementing our ten-yearmaintaining the political impartiality of the civil more than 3O, OOO in 2OO3O4. We will also help“bsvm &-_ -reduced. strategy to tackle drugs, service. But it needs reform to make it more those granted refugee status to integrate into"We will build on these foundations to ensureincluding toughereffective and more entrepreneurial. There have the local community, supporting them so theyMulticultural Britain... an inclusive society begins at schoolthat the Good Friday Agreement is implementedpunishments for dealersbeen important reforms already. We want to take can come off benefits and into work. themselves against the best. Citizens needahas the power to ballot citizens for a mayor. in full and the new institutions take root. We willfurther radical steps to ensure the civil service
We support tough penalties for those whovoice - we will work with local government toRegional governmentestablish a modern, responsive and fully+ by reforming the criminalhas the skills base necessary to meet the engage in the barbaric trade of humanensure that citizens’ needs are the driving force Some functions are best tackled at the regionalaccountable police service properlyjustice system to deal withchallenges set out in this manifesto.
trafficking. We will bring forward proposals toin the procurement and delivery of local services. level. Economic development is the core ofrepresentative of the two main traditions inpersistent offenders and; ensure a common interpretation of the l95lElectronic service delivery offers the prospectregional policy today. In our first term, we haveNorthern Ireland and enjoying their trust andensuring the victims of crimeEqual rights for all, proper enforcement
Convention across the EU and to improve theof greater convenience, access and quality, and created RDAs to drive regional economicsupport. And we will bring about the key reformshave a greater sayof the law, and reformed structures of international response to regional crises. we have set demanding targets for its use. development. Regional chambers have beenin the civil and criminal justice system whichself-government: these are the
When public services are delivered inset up to provide some accountability forsecure the respect and trust of both traditions.- by tackling the causes of crimefoundations of a strong civic society.
partnership with the private and voluntaryregional economic decision-making.2..
sectors, this should be on the basis of bestWe are committed, as RDAs take on moreParliamentary reformthrough [NSrRSUNS like the NewLabour offers opportunity with; value not worst labour standards. The TUPEpower, to enhance the scrutiny functions ofThe House of Commons is now moreDeal and action on truancyresponsibility - the right combination
34regulations protect the rights of any transferred regional chambers. For some regions this degreerepresentative than ever before, yet only one infor Britain in the 2lst century.35Britain needs a government ready to stand up for our interestsTy asysne eropere eve ne most compentweand values. We have a ten-year vision for British foreign’.-
Knowledge ase eco) or de reformed policy: a leading player in Europe, our alliance with the USAamy eo i, bol{ i ®J s -5: Z and enlarged Europe. strengthened, using our global connections to help BritainaAe: ee > ~e 4. o Sy and tackle global problems. anJor ac rerooee:
Delivering Kyoto and internationalra ek Pa ie Fa ns ‘ieEle a -FS 4re4 oa anal sien aswe aiUnlike the Conservatives, we see Europe as an opportunity rer i are ayoeesr:: eee poverty.99not a threat. Because we participate fully, we are able to workae>- ce ae: “ag; on with our partners to shape an EU agenda that advances ourall4aneie 3[.
national interests. We will put democratically elected nationalABeie
+ Lead economic reform in Europegovernments in the driving seat of EU policy. Our ten-year goal4)Fiare\
« Work for the restart of world tradeis to work with our partners for Europe to have the most7‘eae!
talkscompetitive knowledge-based economies in the world. We holdif"rr, I: I to our promise: no membership of the single currency withouteee: Be eioei! aa
+ Strong, effective and responsivethe consent of the British people in a referendum. I7 ‘ ‘I ‘ ee ag anys ge: I ieeeFoes wre ee tm armed forcesete. heea etsafrcoi a i ees
_aeBritain has some of the best armed forces in the world. WithRies ip OT bssii:“Se Se
~ Raise international aid towards the I abour they are being developed to meet the challenges ofaa 3°eet. a: Peal om
UN target, Ege ae 7ae~¥et ed " ae the post-Cold War world.--_- IPe Tasipont-
+ Be the first country to introducen ee ah“ joe: ah pe greenhouse gas trading to cutLabour is committed to lead the development of a comprehensivea‘7“hei‘Sean Lone"mer pollutionagenda for poverty reduction and sustainable development. r, i-: a. Wit'TMLy:_:
We want to mobilise the international community to deliver theFi fan! SPE “uy aedeAF I
International Development Targets, generate growth and equity}lez ty i." eile in developing countries, and help them benefit from global', oe 4aires aeqos,’ [me -_ a economic integration. I ee ee ‘ i. ‘Bb+ i ae ee oe I
We are convinced of the science of global warming. We pledgei/ihhi, aa‘oo A:
to meet tough national targets for environmental protection, Zul% as or rt, ftll:; and we will work at international level to halt and reverseLf2 ato: F,"ld ahy climate change. uo i as¥,/q;" We face a choice between an inward-looking chauvinism thatY ia fe: ae:
leads to isolation and a modern patriotism where the Britishr aei ha‘4 i“A aee national interest is pursued through international engagement. allt: ai: sae' 36i;. a eeat7P; Dmade up of nation states and offering a uniqueWe shall remain the USA’s firm ally and friend; veterans. We have doubled funding forarms sales. Labour will lead efforts to controlindustrialised and developing countries alike. D zs blend of inter-governmental cooperation where -_- but we are not going to turn our backs onresearch on Gulf War illnesses, and willthe trade in small arms, and work for aThe World Trade Organisation must bezs
2possible and integration where necessary, canEurope. The USA and Europe account for tencontinue this important work. comprehensive action plan at this year’s UNreformed, not rejected. We will support fairer2
SsEurope is changing. Economic reform is underbe a major force for good-foritsownmembers __ per cent of world population but 6O per centIn l997 Labour promised a strategicconference on small arms, including anterms of trade for developing countries, and aSs coway in the European Union, with over two million and in the wider world. of global GDP; working together we can tackledefence review. Today, that review is admiredinternational arms surrender fund to providereduction in protectionism in the developedco new jobs created last year. Many new membersWe want to take Europe forward, to meetmany problems and spread the benefits ofaround the world for its clarity, efficiency anddevelopment aid in exchange for firearms. Weworld in areas such as agriculture. We will
4are going to join the EU. Cooperation is beingBritish needs. freedom, peace and prosperity. foresight. We need more mobile and morewill legislate to modernise the regulation ofcontinue to help developing countries exercise4
Ssextended in defence and security policy. A newflexible armed forces, with the ability to project arms exports, with a licensing system to control __ their rights within the WTO. Ss
~way of conducting EU business has been born- - A Europe of prosperityA Europe of the futureforce at distance and speed, to work closelythe activities of arms brokers and traffickersWe support the promotion of higher labour~ comparing best practice to share the benefits of I Europe is acrucial market, accounting for more § The main sources of popular legitimacy inwith other nations and international bodies, wherever they are located. We will work with EUstandards around the world, as well as respect diversity in order to reduce over-reliance onthan half of our trade. Britain has secured a shift I Europe remain national governments andand to fight and keep the peace. We haveapplicant countries to strengthen their capacity for the environment, as we expand world trade.
centralised regulation. in economic policy in Europe - away fromparliaments. So national governments shouldshown what this means in practice in Kosovoto control legal and illicit arms transfers. The International Labour Organisation (ILO)
We face a very simple question. Do we wantharmonisation of rules and towards a systembe seen to be setting the agenda of the EU, withand Sierra Leone, and our servicemen andis the place to set labour standards, but we to be part of the change, influencing itsbased on dynamic markets allied to comparison -_ the European Council setting the EU’s priorities, women have responded magnificently. We arebelieve there should be closer cooperation direction? Or do we want to opt out? We haveand promotion of best practice. a strong independent Commission ensuringdetermined to maximise resources for between the ILO and WTO through the creation spent 5O years on the margins; it is time toThe key priorities are: to deliver more choicethat the European interest is heard andfrontline use by disposing of surplus sparesof a joint standing forum of the two organisations.
make the most of our membership. and lower prices through liberalisation ofenforced, and an effective European Parliamentand promoting smart procurement andBritain belongs to a unique range of influentialWe are committed to encouraging universal
We have seen the alternative. By l997 Britain financial services and utilities; to promoteimproving draft legislation and holding theefficiency savings. global organisations, giving us responsibilitiesobservance of human rights. Governments that had retreated into itself: business was global, business development with a common EUCommission to account. The European Defence Initiative is anand opportunities. Labour will stand up for Britain. are democratically elected will be firmer allies people travelled and worked around the world, patent and cuts in red tape; to develop ourLabour wants the next Inter-governmentalimportant part of our defence policy. Europe- At the UN, where we support a more modernfor peace; open societies that respect our culture was open to new ideas, yet ourcommon research effort in frontierConference in 2OO4 to address public concernsspends two-thirds as much as the US onand representative Security Council, with more _ individual freedom will be more reliable trade government was closing itself off. And Britaintechnologies like bioscience; to cut delaysabout the way the EU works, spelling out inadefence, but gets only a fraction of itseffective peace-keeping. partners. Labour will be a friend of those got a worse deal. Because they were backwardand fares by establishing an integrated Airclear statement of principles what should andeffectiveness. European nations need to- At the Group of 7 leading industrialiseddenied human rights and a supporter of steps looking and divided on Europe, the Conservatives Traffic Control system for Europe; and toshould not be done at European level. Labourmodernise their armed forces for rapid andcountries, where we will stay at the forefrontto strengthen them.
were weak and ineffective in Europe. Anddevelop effective labour market policy tosupports a stronger role for nationalflexible deployment. Improved EU militaryof efforts to promote development. Labour has played a leading role in bringing because of their weakness in Europe, Britaintackle unemployment in dialogue with theparliaments in European affairs, for examplecapabilities will not be separate from NATO- Inthe Commonwealth, where we will workwar criminals, notably from former Yugoslavia, lost influence around the world. We lost oursay -_ social partners. in a second chamber of the Europeanstructures and would only be deployed whereto promote human rights and bridge theto justice, and in establishing a permanent over decisions that affected our lives. We support efforts being made across theParliament, with a particular remit to overseeNATO as a whole chooses not to engage. Thedigital divide. court to try war crimes. We will work to make
In the last four years we have seen theEU to reform welfare states, modernise socialthe division of competences. We will also insistlaunch of an EU operation will follow aWe will argue for an early, comprehensivethe International Criminal Court a reality, with benefits of engagement. Our rebate has beenpartnership and advance social inclusion. EUthat the Commission completes its internalunanimous decision, with each member state -_ world trade round, to the benefit ofBritain as one of its first members.
np_-state aid policy should bear down on aids thatreform programme. free to decide whether to take part.
-fees 'dim Idistort the single market while supportingWe support Trident, Britain’s minimum rt-pyeconomic modernisation. We will keep the vetonuclear deterrent. The Nuclear Non-
+LII onvital matters of national sovereignty, such asProliferation Treaty commits us to work for the-TMow‘ re ' i, I¥ ltax and border controls. global elimination of nuclear weapons. We are- a e io rE. 2 Eth ae rie ' coeie -_I illTrade has been a vital source of prosperity for _ Britain’s national security is based on theenthusiastic signatories to the Comprehensivea: r edA a ai
4Europe’s citizens. Our vision is of an openmutual support that comes from membershipTest Ban Treaty, whose coming into force willSe nthe eee f iyEre I Saar amy
}European economy. That requires a genuineof NATO. That will not change. And althoughimpede nuclear proliferation, and we want toTs ee el -Bye "aes c warcysingle market, in an open world trading system. Britain has rarely been more secure fromsee the USA and Russia continue to reduceParr a oe itd oT edr. ee a, pe
Iforeign invasion, there are new threats to ourtheir nuclear stockpiles. eewe r oe i Hf “By. ip F ba ” - a ee eg ee
A wider Europepeople from crime and terrorism. InstabilityWe recognise the new dangers posed by theneiatmiJ 7 Ps } ee: afp
New countries joining the EU will give Britainaround the world can affect us directly and weproliferation of nuclear, chemical and72 a:‘I5 mao~~ abigger market and Europe a bigger voice. have a global responsibility to play our part inbiological weapons, and the need to combat‘Faih
-.*rhMembership will help guarantee the freedomsreducing international conflict, controlling thethem. Nuclear arms reductions and." *:
i. F I *: of the new democracies in central and easternspread of weapons of mass destruction, andproliferation controls remain an important partlf f; Af x: eke 4 a. aEurope. Labour is pledged to do all it can tocontributing to international peace-keepingof defence and security policy. We will seek‘iSee
Britain is leading economic reform in Europeenable the first group of applicant countriesto and peace-making operations. effective inspections against the developmentee aeps oeie:
protected and our contributions are falling tojoin in time to take part in the next EuropeanTo enable the European Union to act whereof chemical and biological weapons. We willai5 ion Stee aleq similar levels as France and Italy. The LabourParliamentary elections in 2OO4. NATO chooses not to, the EU should improveencourage the US to consult closely with NATOceo ryea j red Ied{:
model of defence cooperation - giving EuropeIt is vital we ratify the Treaty of Nice which isits military capabilities for humanitarian, allies on its ideas for missile defence, and tol.‘ Fa f F 4tn RE the option to act where NATO chooses not to --essential to enlargement; Labour in government peace-keeping and crisis management tasks. pursue dialogue with Russia on a newSer toF aye‘ sie Lot ie “he I has won through. Economic reform is nowwill do so. The Conservatives have said theyOur armed forces are the best in the worldframework for strategic arms control that willa: I ote2 ie helping the European economy. The veto onwill insist on trying to renegotiate Europe’sat fighting if they have to, and keeping theencourage further cuts in nuclear weapons.,. asaat:; “ "a" ‘ ‘i crucial issues of national sovereignty, such astreaties at the first summit after the election. peace where they can. Labour is committed toThe British defence industry is a vital part of car) mI it ePaper tae ba ef ae ey sitaeat Pri - tax, is safe. All this happened only becauseNo other country agrees with this. That means __ investing more in real terms in our armedour economy, sustaining some 35O, OOO highe es ee rad Been pe ae! Fh: aie
Labour had the strength to get involved, arguethat a Conservative government would either services over the next three years, the firsttechnology jobs. We will continue to workeas red Ere: segue te n Fg pee# Sig ae hens for its ideas, and persuade others to follow us. have to back down in the face of opposition, yearon-year real increase in funds for over aclosely with our best companies to get theea ae sa Ee F oh a m: nal eRe eee
Labour believes that Europe brings benefitsor take Britain out of Europe altogether withdecade. An important part of that investmentbest equipment for our armed forces - a goodea fay ee ro "He a iE Be ht B. Paha for Britain, and a Europe reformed by Britishdisastrous consequences for Britain. will be in better service accommodation. Wedeal for the taxpayer as well as a secureee i eee Ty Sad Few, II Psa -,. ee ideas, working with our MEPs, will be evenOur argument is that if Britainis stronger in are determined to recruit and retain the bestfuture for high-technology jobs. ie’ieI ahiaes eee hee better for Britain. Together with virtually allother Europe, it will be stronger in the rest of thepeople, from all walks of life and allThe UK has introduced the most open reportaes, alr fee ea Se bata ice. eae See
European countries we do not support a United -_ world. We reject the view of those who say we _- backgrounds. on arms exports of any European nation andie Soe fefh ie aa tae
38States of Europe. But we do believe a Europemust choose between Europe and the USA. We will look after the interests of Britain’shas led the EU to adopt a code of conduct onKeeping the peace in Kosovo Labour is investing in strong, effective and responsive armed forces39Ddemocracy. We will legislate to toughen controls __ will work with reforming governments, South Africa next year. biofuels. By increasing demand for newa BeD aSover UK nationals who commit offences ofinternational institutions, the private sector andWe are one of the few countries to have mettechnologies we can boost innovation and the5aS
2corruption abroad. civil society in support of nationally ownedour l992 obligations to hold greenhouse gases _ vitality of the UK car industry.}‘he iy, rtoa2
SsIn l997 Labour pledged to give new priority toLabour will champion increased effectiveness development strategies. We will also redoublein 2OOO below their l99O levels. In l997 we- tis imperative that we use natural resources' hha#lSs cotackling global poverty. Four years on, thereand a stronger focus on poverty reduction within -_ our efforts to prevent and resolve violentset a target of reducing CO. emissions by 2Omore efficiently and recycle more. We willi_,]co have been real achievements - a cabinetinternational institutions - particularly the EU, conflicts in Africa, using our new Africa conflictper cent by 2OlO. We will meet our obligations -_ continue to tax pollution and reward clean* oei\*5 i
4minister heads an internationally respectedbut also the World Bank, IMF, UN andfund to provide help for security sector reform, arising from the Kyoto protocol and have setproduction. We will develop environmental‘4
Ssdepartment, the aid budget has beenCommonwealth - with full support for povertydemilitarisation programmes and tighterout a detailed strategy to achieve more - a 23productivity indicators. We have set a target forqax4Ss
~substantially raised, and tied aid abolished. reduction strategies where they genuinelycontrols over small arms. per cent cut in greenhouse gases by 2OlO. The __ the recycling of 35 per cent of household wasteihnI~
Britain is playing a leading world role on debtprioritise poverty reduction. We are committedRoyal Commission on Environmental Pollutionby 2Ol5, and will work with all local authorities7 Tea relief, education, HIV/AIDS, andinrespondingto -_ to international action to put the needs ofhas said the UK will need to cut CO; production _to introduce kerbside recycling schemesA humanitarian disasters. With strong UKchildren at the centre of these strategies. Byby 6O per cent by 2O5O, so we need to presswherever appropriate. Wy l leadership, the international development effort I 2OO6 we want to raise to 7O per cent theahead with a radical agenda for the- Water management is a vital challenge for the-. r is now increasingly focused on poverty reduction. proportion of EU aid going to low incomeThe poor make the smallest per capitadevelopment of low carbon economic growth, future - for the environment and for the growingcS
This is morally right, but also in our interest. countries, and work with the Commission, contribution to climate change, but are oftenembodied in our £7OO million commitment toworld population. We will continue to make ouree oe A
Many of the world’s biggest challenges - fromParliament and other governments tomost affected when it happens. We arerenewable energy. contribution at home: leakage is down by almost _ International aid... education has a special place for Labour violent conflict to rapid population growth tostrengthen the EU’s development effort. convinced by the scientific evidence of climateIn addition to our proposals for3O per cent since l997, bills have been cut by environmental threat - are caused orLabour has led internationally on debt relief, change - and convinced that now is the timeenvironmental technology and renewablel2 per cent and disconnections have been ended. Britain can be pivotal to world exacerbated by global poverty and inequality. providing lOO per cent relief for countriesto act. We need action at local, national andenergy described in ‘Prosperity for all’, we must + Environmental protection and sustainable...
There can be no secure future for any of uscommitted to spending the proceeds on poverty: _ international level if we are to preserve thealso make progress in the following areas: development go hand in hand. We cannotaffairs, using our alliances to reduction. We will work to help more of thestability of our natural environment over the- We must make the market work for theprotect the environment without addressing theadvance our interests and values.
heavily indebted poor countries qualify fordebt next 5O years. The principle of mutualenvironment. Britain is developing the firstdevelopment needs of the poor, and povertyThe key is to use our strengths of ld +relief where this benefits the poor. And we willresponsibility that governs our approachnational CO, emissions trading system in thereduction depends on safeguarding naturalhistory and geography to engage iketnwork to prevent new debt burdens throughto social problems also applies toworld. It will help companies find the mostresources on which poor people depend. with other countries, not retreat.
€~international agreement not to give exportenvironmental issues. efficient way of reducing emissions - and- We will continue to provide leadership abroad, That is Labour’s promise.
credits for excessive military spending orThe healthy future of our environment is onereward them for doing so. Once the system isworking for international agreement on climate prestige projects. of the world’s great challenges. We must makeestablished here we will seek to extend itchange, improved integration of the environment fEducation has a special place for Labour. We -- substantial changes in the way we work and livearound the world. in European policies and a strong global will increase further our support for qualityto safeguard all our futures. The UK played a- We will support hybrid and fuel cell vehicles, environment agency built around the current UN primary education for all, particularly for girls. leading role in the Kyoto conference. Thewhich already offer a halving of fuelenvironment programme. We will work to improve
Our Imfundo project, part of an £8OO milliontargets for reducing greenhouse gas emissionsconsumption and CO. emissions, with cheaper - marine and forest conservation overseas and education programme, will bring together public I agreed at that conference are a vital first stepmotoring to match - and for cleaner fuels andin the UK.
and private sector commitment to use IT toin the battle against global warming. It is critical. ensure effective teacher training and education _ that the whole international community plays management. We will give top priority toits part in making a reality of sustainable
--vacombating the spread of HIV/AIDS, which isdevelopment. We are determined to play ariesacimeese te
Promoting human rights... Tony Blair with Nelson Mandelaeg gsA.. A’.. Paroeral ytSeaterSea EEE inflicting massive human and economic costs constructive role at the ‘Rio plus lO’ meeting inSEE Ree nena Le Recaro eth ee ae ee ee unless we promote greater global social justice. across the developing world. We will work for thetf rT ae eset Ai eg ia ees eed seca araatt
Labour will continue to focus Britain’screation of a global health fund to makeHow Labour is strengthening yourLata aaa as eee aeons ee ens a abisiet era Gee ae i pees feta sas development effort on the achievement ofthe essential drugs and commodities morevoice in the world: eS ARs aed roy ee ot ene eee ac ia eae tia) eb et ed ean a es eecine tien sr international development targets by 2Ol5- accessible to the poor, focusing on TB, malariaBiers cts trea spsrsrces hon eutei wre ast tar ete cunts cre cae etceet et aehr eb pen nn population living in extreme poverty, reducingsupport for the development of basic healthcaredifor Britain’s rightpr rcaacholau aac evcee neiroe cant eee ire eae ie pete ae ee Bee peetan idea arta teeter ean es child and infant mortality by two-thirds, primary systems, and our new tax credits to incentiviseStanding up for Britain's rightsMipeee ech ones nde ct a Ee See eer te ee ee eee education for all children, and sustainableresearch by the drug companies into theand reforming Europe to promotepee ee ies obtee Ee Be Suu naan sibs cy Ree Uses coat nee Sime esha development plans in every country. diseases of poverty. jobs and deepen democracyieee ores RE aang eaaag ta he diag atk eeettotegr See ects EE ee ree Hee
With Labour the aid budget will rise toDevelopment goes much wider than aid and: cass Wicneagetrseetts PeteHatatels SUSE T EEE Sere! REO oe eae
O.33 per cent of GNP by 2OO3O4, reachingdebt relief. It is also about how we manage the- by supporting our armed forces, Reread sieves OOS De ee,
£3.6 billion - a 45 per cent increase in realglobal economy. Our aim is to shape globalisationmaking sure our troops areBARE EnE? De Sortaae ES a Seeks sear a 7 terms since l997 level. We remain committedso that it works better for the world’s poor. always available and effectivepase gr5. ite SIE i acieggaipeeee are to the UN target of O.7 per cent of nationalTrade is key but so is private investment. Wein times of crisis::” all“a a aeit 2 aereah fi income devoted to development and will makewill promote socially responsible businessa: ee, eea all ae -_ a ee sal.
further substantial increases over the nextpractice through advisory services on codes of- by working to tackle globaljciatien cement -
Parliament. We remain committed to our bill, social responsibility, the ethical tradingclimate change, meeting our ~aa blocked by the Tories, to consolidate ourinitiative, the Export Credit Guarantee:;:. own tough targets and pushing poverty-focused approach to developmentDepartment’s new code of business principles,;:
We are using this aid to support political andthe Commonwealth Development Corporation’sother countries to meet theirs’ economic reform in developing countries. Ourpartnership with the private sector, and our;;;-.
aid is an investment to help countries put ininitiatives to encourage private investment in- by leading the fight against global2S: many place policies to raise the growth rate withinfrastructure. poverty, with increased aid, betterae greater equity, crack down on corruption, Nowhere will our resolve be more tested thanspentmae. aa promote human rights, including for women and ___ in Africa. Labour is committed to strengtheningieaid
4Ogirls, and develop effective governance andour partnership for development with Africa. WeNatural resources... Labour is committed to a healthy environment and renewable energy, taxing pollution and rewarding clean production4Ihe chol for Brita 25 st to a better Brita
These are our ambitions for Britain - and how they can be achieved. Clear in our values,455A5 confident in our policies, we seek a new mandate from the British people. Basic skills forVenture capital£l8O billionRaise the minimum [Mg £l, OOO tax cut -
75O, OOO peoplefunds in everyinvestment inwage to £4.2Othe Children’s Tax
We are proud of our record in government. But we are not yet satisfied. Labour is the partyregiontransport, withCredit - for parents of reform and we fight this election as agents of change in Britain.25 local rail andof newborn children tram schemes
Change to our economy, so more people share the benefits of growth. Change in our public services, so that they better advance equality of opportunity. Change in our welfare system, so that we extend security, responsibility and independence. Change to tackle crime and, A5A its causes. Change to deepen our democracy. Change to Britain’s role in the world. Every secondaryRecruit an extraMore power toMore health serviceFree access to school with alO, OOO teachersfrontline staffworkers - 2O, OOOnational museums
The Conservatives were rejected in l997 because they had failed. The national debt haddistinct ethos, more nurses, and atand galleries doubled; crime had doubled; we were 42nd in the world education league; one in fivemission or centreleast lO, OOO more households was on benefit; and we were marginalised in Europe. orexeetiencedoctors
Yet instead of learning, the Conservatives have become more dogmatic, more extreme, more divided. They are worse than ever."ei"7ie
An ‘EmploymentExpanded supportExtend andNew pension credit£9OO million
The British people now face a choice. New Labour stands in the political mainstream, rootedFirst’ interview forfor children throughincrease paidfor lower- andNeighbourhood in the best values of the British people. The Conservatives have veered to extreme positions. everyone coming ontax and benefitmaternity leave andmiddle-incomeRenewal Fund for to benefitsreformintroduce paidpensioners and thejobs, education and
This election will decide whether we continue the policies that have brought us economicpaternity leavePaymentrctine; crime prevention stability, steady growth, investment in public services and targeted tax cuts for children and families, or whether we lurch back to boom and bust. It will decide whether we put our schools, hospitals and police officers first, or put them second after unaffordable tax cuts. It will decidel6l7l8l93O whether we modernise the criminal justice system. It will decide whether we stand for a positiveAnextra 6, OOODouble the amountIncreasedAbill of rights forNew freedoms with engagement with Europe and the wider world, or retreat to the sidelines. police recruitsof assets seizedsentences plusvictimsnew targets for raising policefrom drug traffickerseducation andlocal government
We want everyone to vote in this election. But before you do, think of your job; think of yournumbers to theirand other majordrug treatment mortgage; think of your school and hospital; think of your children and your parents; thinkhighest-ever levelullWhedbee of police and crime prevention, think of the choice of leadership.
Think of who you want to succeed in Britain - the many or the few.
There is still much to do with new Labour - and a lot for you to lose under the Conservatives.
The choice is clear: for an ambitious and confident Britain, the choice is Labour.
4224O/Ol
Printed by HH Associates
City House, Sutton Park Road,
Sutton, Surrey SMl 2AE
Promoted by Margaret McDonagh
General Secretary, The Labour Party on behalf of the Labour Party, both at Millbank Tower, Millbank,
London SWlP 4GT
Design by Atelier Works
75 per cent. Unemployment is at its lowest level for 25 years.
The record: With the private sector, we will
The record: Key Stage 2 results for literacy andinvest a record £l8O billion in transport numeracy reached 75 per cent (up l2 per centinfrastructure over the next ten years. We will since l997) and 72 per cent (up lO per centThe record: The next four years will see theachieve a 23 per cent cut in greenhouse gas since l997) in 2OOl. GCSE and Alevel resultsbiggest-ever sustained increase in NHSemissions. We have legislated to promote have also improved. This September there willspending. Over £l billion will have beenprotection for and access to the countryside.
be no five-, six- and seven-year-olds in classreleased from administration by next year. TheA£l.6 billion strategy for farming and rural sizes over 3O. We have cut the costs of debtNHS is treating 62O, OOO more inpatients andis _ enterprise will redirect subsidies to promote and unemployment by nearly £9 billion per year. I seeing over 65O, OOO more outpatients than ingrowth and the environment.
Education spending has risen from 4.7 percent l99697. There are l7, lOO more nurses and of national income to 5 per cent this year.6,7OO more doctors than in l997. There are l24, OOO fewer people on waiting lists.
The record: We cut the basic rate of income taxThe record: The funding of political parties, to 22p in April 2OOO and introduced the lOpcampaign expenditure and conduct of band in April l999. There has been noincrease ‘The record: The British Crime Survey shows that _ referendums is now regulated. For the first time in the top rate of income tax. The direct taxoverall crime fell by lO per cent from l997 tothe UK has a Freedom of Information Act. The burden ona single earner family on averagel999. Investment is now rising. The time fromScottish Parliament, Welsh Assembly and earnings with two children is the lowestarrest to sentence for persistent youngNorthern Ireland Assembly are now up and since l972. offenders is down from l42 days to 89 days --running, while local democracy has beenPicture credits on track to halve the time within the five yearsreturned to the people of London. The first stage-- promised in l997. of reform of the House of Lords has reduced thePhil Sayer number of hereditary peers to fewer than lOO.
Feature photography
Sally Soames
Phil Sayer
The record: Net borrowing in every year froml997 to 2OO3O4 is forecast to be lower than inThe record: Labour has negotiated successfully any Tory year from l99293 to l99697. The record: Child benefit has been raised by over _ for Britain in Europe. Our rebate is protected, OO
Inflation has been consistently under control25 per cent for the first child. The Children’s Taxenlargement is being taken forward. We haveEdmund Clark and on target. Economic growth has beenCredit is worth up to £52O a year. We haveled the debate on European economic reforma Record steady, averaging 2.75 per cent a year sinceintroduced parental leave and rights to holidays. I and on the development of a European defencelec SReey l997. Living standards are on average aboutWe have extended maternity leave. £4.5 billioncapacity rooted in NATO structures. In Kosovo, The Photolibrary Wales lO per cent higher in real terms than in l997. extra in real terms is being spent this year onour armed forces played a leading role inee Ceres STE esos pensioners. The basic state pension will rise tostanding up against ethnic cleansing. South West Tourism
£75.5O for single pensioners and £l2O.7O forIEEE.. weRoy Peters/reportdigital. co. uk pensioner couples next year, while the minimumLen Grant
The record: Over 28O, OOO unemployed youngincome guarantee is helping over l.6 million ofShout/reportdigital. co. uk people have been helped into work by Labour’s -_ the poorest pensioners. TV licence fees have--
New Deal. There are over one million more jobs in been abolished for the over-75s, with free.
the economy than in l997. Youth unemployment -_ access to national museums and galleries forca “y now stands at its lowest level since l975, long- _ children and pensioners. Aw Be
44term unemployment among under-25s is downoe pore. iss -_z
- oe;: r- rijtg fFi
_- i ~ ~ Soem,‘a
A modern welfare state joyie al‘s i,
-t‘; tIa Pe a r \ +)% 4 Pypy rh 4’ ailI a ae j aFi]I ee
‘“Sa.
9 III I l