The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5
Britain forward not back
Contents
Preface by Tony Blair ccccccccccceveeecsseseeeseessecsseesseesseeseessseeseesssesssessees
New Labour’s record: The contract delivered O.. cccccceseeseeseereeeeeeee LO
Chapter l
Economy: Rising prosperity n An Opportunity SOCIELY ccccecceeeeeee LA
Chapter 2
Education: More children making the gladeccccccccccccccssesstseesessseess OO
Chapter 3
Crime and security: Safe communities, Secure DOVAGS lcccccesceeseeereeee 42
Chapter 4
Our NHS: Free to all, personal tO CACM v.. ceeccccccseesettestteteeseseess DO
Chapter 5
Older people: Secure today, prepared for the fUture.. cccccccccccceeeceereees, 68
Chapter 6
Families: Choice and support at work and At hOME weececccccsccsseeseessees LA
Chapter 7
International policy:
A stronger country in a secure, sustainable and just WorldO... OOOOOOO. 82
Chapter 8
Quality of life: Excellence for All... cecccccccccssesesessseseseeseseesseteeerneee OD
Chapter 9
Democracy: Power devolved, citizens empowered ccccccceccsseereereeeeees LOZ
Labour pe
2OO5Britain
FPreface; New Labour’s 2OO5 manifesto applies the unchanging values of our party to: the new priorities of the British people.
iIt is a plan to improve the lives of hard-: fworking families and prepare our
’country for success in a fast-changing fworld. Our case rests on one idea more
\than any other - that it is the duty of
-.. government to provide opportunity and security for all in a changing world.
Every chapter relates back to that goal:
4breaking down the barriers that stop people fulfilling their talent, extending opportunity to every corner of the
United Kingdom, building communities strong and safe for those who play by the rules. On the firm foundations we have laid since l997, our programme will embed. a. new progressive consensus in our country.
45The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Preface Tony Blair
Eight years ago, I offered new leadership - fresh, idealistic, books and computers - and pupils show me, with pride, round their energetic, but untested. You voted for change and gave me thesparkling new school.
chance to serve. In our first term we banished the demons of ten per cent interest rates, mass unemployment, wages ofIhave met youngsters in Blackpool and London whose lives have been
£l.5O an hour, and outside toilets in our schools. We puttransformed by the New Deal - once written off, they are now full of
Labour values into action. And we banished Labour demonsconfidence and ambition.
too: we showed we could run the economy well, cut crime, and stand up for Britain abroad. We proved our competence. TPve been to communities in Southampton and Darlington where the
Sure Start programme is helping overcome disadvantage and seen for
Four years ago, I said we needed to continue the modernisation of ourmyself the remarkable revival of our great cities.
economy, coupled with investment and reform to achieve change in public services. At the end of this second term we have delivered anI have met aid workers in Africa who tell me how this country is unprecedented period of stability and growth, we have increasedimproving the lives of the poorest on our planet.
investment and we have embarked on a radical programme of reform to put the people themselves in the driving seat of our public services. These are not the fantasy of politicians. They are the stories of real life
We have made difficult decisions - about health policy, studentin our country and abroad. Not for everyone. Not everywhere. But for finance, and secondary school reform. In the process we have provedenough people and in enough places for us to know it is not a fluke.
our resilience. Now we go to the people not only having delivered onPersonal prosperity and the good society; the fruit of partnership our promises, but also setting new and more ambitious goals for ourbetween the British people and a government on their side.
public services and our country.
Now we have to decide whether to go forward or back.
But Britain can be better still.
Britain is on the right track. We will not change direction. Neither will
I know the change is possible. Not just because I have studied the stawe rest on our laurels. Our third-term opportunity is to build on the tistics, but because I have seen it with my own eyes, across the lengthprogress we have made. That progress, first as a party then in governand breadth of the United Kingdom. ment began with the insight that the only way to advance decent progressive values was to develop a new policy agenda. Our underI have spoken to NHS staff in Coventry, Edinburgh and Swansea, standing of the world and the great changes underway in our society who tell me how their new hospital and the new funding is letting themled us to reject the false choices of the past. This is the foundation stone improve care for their patients. of new Labour.
Ihave heard teachers in Bexley, Middlesbrough and Sheffield tell meI believe that in our third term we can embed a new progressive conhow they no longer have to work in crumbling classrooms withoutsensus. One that reflects the mission of our movement, and the hopes
67The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Preface Tony Blair and values of our people. And as much as the pursuit of this consensusenvironment, at the heart of Europe, working together to tackle terror represents an unprecedented opportunity for progressive politics, so itand spread peace and justice.
will be bitterly opposed by those who seek to take us back to the divisions of the past. We do not duck the tough choices - from independence for the Bank of England to the tax rise we made for the NHS, to the war in Iraq. We
In our third term we will forge an even stronger bond between themade decisions because we believed them right - not because they goals of economic progress and social justice. No going back to fiscalwere destined to be popular.
irresponsibility. No going back to a Conservative government that says mass unemployment is a price worth paying. Going forward insteadBut we refuse to accept false choices. The British people never wanted to an opportunity economy, spreading prosperity through highto choose between wealth creation and social justice. They never wantemployment and welfare reform, spreading opportunity throughed to choose between national security and overseas aid. They never widening access to university and training, spreading ownershipwanted to choose between equal rights and protection from crime.
through the Child Trust Fund and expanding homeownership. These are the false choices that landed us with economic decline and social division.
In our third term we will make public services safe for a generation.
No going back to one-size-fits-all monolithic services. No going backThe British people have the capacity to make this a great country. Our to the Tory years of cuts and privatisation. Going forward instead toideals are undimmed: extend opportunity to all, demand responsibiliservices free to all, personal to each: breaking once and for all the dropty from all, secure justice for all. Our policies are refreshed: never has a out culture in education and the waiting-list culture in health, by rais-governing party proposed a more wide-ranging programme of change ing investment and driving innovation through diversity of provisionfor the country. Our vision is clear: a country more equal in its opporand power in the hands of the patient, the parent and the citizen. tunities, more secure in its communities, more confident in its future.
It is our social contract: we help you, you help yourself; you benefit and
In our third term we will cement a new social contract with rightsthe country benefits.
matched by responsibilities. No going back to ‘no such thing as society’. Going forward instead to power and resources in the hands of theSo now, I fight my last election as Leader of my party and Prime law-abiding majority. A government committed both to abolishingMinister of our country. My call is a passionate one: let’s togethchild poverty and to putting the values of individual responsibility ander make irreversible the positive changes that are happening in duty at the very heart of policy. our country. Let’s make the values of social justice and a fair deal for all the governing ideal of our country not just for some time
In our third term we will show that our national interest can only bebut for all time. People freed from barriers of class, building a pursued by engaging with the world’s great challenges. No going backbetter future for themselves and for the country. Self-interest to a Britain marginalised and weak. Going forward to a stronger coun-and national interest together.
try in a safer, fairer world. Leading on Africa, leading on the
89The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Britain forward not back meltTM Prosperity for all n va Walya ee a stable, growing economy with the lowest inflation since theS.
L/.
New Labour's record:
The contract delive redSince l997, two million more people are in work, and the UK has the
O. h. flowest unemployment for 3O years. Tax credits and the minimum wage ur cou ntry Isc angl ng orare ensuring that work pays for everyone.
the better, because we fulfilled. Because of this we are saving £5 billion a year on the costs of unemthe prom ISES of our l99 a andployment - that’s £84 for every citizen in Britain - money that is being
2OOl manifestos. Here is whatinvested in frontline services such as schools and hospitals.
has Cc ha nged. There are over one million more homeowners, saving on average nearly £4, OOO a year, thanks to the lowest mortgage rates for 4O years.
Since l997, average incomes have increased by l9 per cent and the income of a typical family has increased by l7 per cent, with living standards rising in double digits for every part of the income spectrum.
There are 3OO, OOO more businesses, providing jobs and increased prosperity.
There are two million fewer children and nearly two million fewer pensioners living in absolute poverty.
® World-class public services
Investment in public services is up - an extra £l, OOO per pupil per year in real terms since l997, and spending on the NHS has more than doubled to £69 billion. There are over 28, OOO more teachers and lO5, OOO extra teaching assistants and support staff. The National
Health Service now has 79, OOO more nurses and over 27, OOO more doctors. And public servants - from nurses to police officers - are better rewarded for their work.
lOllThe Labour Party manifesto 2OO5New Labour’s record: The contract delivered
Our ten-year-old pupils are ranked third best in the world in literacyThere are record numbers of police, nearly l3, OOO more, assisted by and are the fastest improving in numeracy.4,6OO new Community Support Officers.
Since the introduction of free entry, visits to our national museumsNew powers to tackle anti-social behaviour have been introduced, with and galleries have risen by 75 per cent. nearly 4, OOO Anti-Social Behaviour Orders issued so far and nearly
66, OOO fixed penalty notices.
Deaths from heart disease are down by 27 per cent and cancer deaths are down by l2 per cent. We have halved the time from arrest to sentencing for persistent young offenders.
@ A modern welfare state
Thanks to our New Deal, long-term youth unemployment has beenMore than 8O per cent of initial decisions on asylum claims are now virtually eradicated, with over half a million young people helpedprocessed in two months.
into work.
§ Britain strong in the world
By October 2OO5, families with children will be on average £l,4OO aBritain’s interests are at the heart of an enlarged European Union, with year better off as a result of our tax and benefit measures compared toeconomic reform putting jobs first.
l997.
Our international aid budget for the world’s poorest countries has
Thanks to our reforms pensioner households are on average £l,5OO amore than doubled.
year better off, rising to £2, OOO for the poorest third.
We have successfully pressed for the restarting of world trade talks
Maternity leave has increased to 26 weeks and maternity pay haswhich will focus on the needs of developing countries.
almost doubled.
Our strong, effective and responsive armed forces are ensuring the
There are l.2 million more older people in employment. The employ-defence of Britain’s interests.
ment rate for people aged between 5O and pension age has increased by over five percentage points to 7O per cent. We introduced greenhouse-gas trading to cut pollution - the first country to do so - reducing emissions by 9.8 million tonnes in the first
® Strong and safe communitiestwo years.
Crime has fallen by 3O per cent overall, with almost five million fewer crimes a year than in l997.
l2l3The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Britain forward not back meltLabour’s economic record is unprecedented - the highest n va Walyemployment ever, longest period of uninterrupted growth in modern history, lowest sustained interest and inflation rates
Chapter lfor a generation. Our economic policies will build on the platEconomy: Ri si n g prosperity inform of stability and growth in three ways: entrenching a low-.. debt/high-employment economy which generates investment an opportun Ity Soc letyin public services; supporting enterprise and wealth creation
Fo rwa rd to inc reased pros perity, by making Britain the best place to do business; and helping every part of Britain and every person in Britain to connot back to boom and busttribute to and gain from the strength of our economy. And as we work globally to tackle climate change we recognise l979-l997: Interest rates avera ge overthe challenge and the opportunity of achieving sustainable, ttdevelopment at home.
en per cen l997-2OO5: Britain, the fourth largest economylm The new Labour case in the world, with the lon gest everOur economic record has finally laid to rest the view that Labour could.,. not be trusted with the economy. We are winning the argument that period of continuous growtheconomic dynamism and social justice must go hand in hand. In the
9OlO: Full employment in every regionfuture the countries that do best will be those with a shared purpose and nationabout the long-term changes and investments they need to make - and have the determination to equip their people for that future. So, we approach new challenges with a progressive strategy for growth. In our third term we will build new ladders of social mobility and advancement on the firm foundations of stability, investment and growth.
& Low debt and high employment
In the last eight years we have pioneered a British way to economic stability. Our economy has grown in every quarter with this Government.
Interest rates have averaged 5.3 per cent since l997, saving mortgage payers on average nearly £4, OOO per year compared to the Tory years.
Only with Labour, which constructed this framework, will this continue. We will maintain our inflation target at two per cent. We will l4l5The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Economy: Rising prosperity in an opportunity society continue to meet our fiscal rules: over the economic cycle, we will bor-clothes, books, newspapers and public transport fares. We will continrow only to invest, and keep net debt at a stable and prudent level. ue to make targeted tax cuts for families and to support work. As a result of personal tax and benefit measures introduced since l997, by
® Public spending and taxationOctober 2OO5 families with children will be on average £l,4OO a year
The longest period of uninterrupted economic growth in modernbetter off in real terms. Living standards in Britain have been rising, on times has enabled the Government to deliver the longest period of sus-average, by 2.5 per cent per year since l997 - a total increase of tained investment in public services for a generation. Social securitynearly 2O per cent.
bills for unemployment have been halved since l997, saving £5 billion a year, and we are also saving £4 billion a year on debt interest payWe want a tax regime that supports British business. That is why we ments. Over the ten-year period l99798 to 2OO7O8, real-termshave cut corporation tax to its lowest ever level, introduced the best investment per year in education will have risen by 4.8 per cent and inregime of capital gains tax in any industrialised country, and introhealth by 6.5 per cent. duced a new Research and Development tax credit.;; Full employment
‘We are WINNING the argument thatOur goal is employment opportunity for all - the modern definition of... full employment. Britain has more people in work than ever before,
ECONOMIC dynamis TMm and socialwith the highest employment rate in the G7. Our long-term aim is to;.. raise the employment rate to 8O per cent. And, as we move more peojustice must go hand nN hand’ple from welfare to work, the savings on unemployment benefits will go towards investing more in education.
Every pound we invest goes further because of our drive for efficiencyWe will make work pay. With Labour’s tax credits a family with two and reform. Labour will complete the implementation of Sir Peterchildren pays no net tax until their earnings reach £2l, OOO.
Gershon’s recommendations to improve public-service efficiency and root out waste, liberating over £2l billion for investment in frontWe will implement the recommendations of the Low Pay Commission line services. to raise the minimum wage to £5. O5 from October 2OO5 and £5.35 from October 2OO6.
Labour believes tax policy should continue to be governed by the health of the public finances, the requirement for public investmentThe New Deals and the creation of JobCentre Plus have made a major and the needs of families, business and the environment. contribution to cutting unemployment. The active welfare state created since l997 is working.
We will not raise the basic or top rates of income tax in the next
Parliament. We renew our pledge not to extend VAT to food, children’sThe Tories trebled the number on incapacity benefits. We will help l6l7The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5 people who can work into rehabilitation and eventually into employment, recognising the practical assistance to disabled people of the
Access to Work scheme. We will build on the successful Pathways to
Work programme and reform Incapacity Benefit, with the main elements of the new benefit regime in place from 2OO8. The majority of claimants with more manageable conditions will be required to engage in both work-focused interviews and in activity to help them prepare for a return to work. Those with the most severe conditions will also be encouraged to engage in activity and should receive more money than¢° now. We will continue to welcome new independent and voluntaryI. nN Our third term We sector partners to provide job-seeking services.
w Supporting enterprisewill build new ladders
Government does not create wealth but it must support the wealth creators. That is why our priorities are the national infrastructure ofO yf S O Cl a / Mm O bl, hh. cy an d skills, science, regulation and planning, and transport. The economy of the future will be based on knowledge, innovation and creativity. That° applies both to manufacturing and services. advanc e Mm e 4) t On the firm
In a fast changing global economy, government cannot postpone or°°7e prevent change. The modern role for government -- the case for a mod-founda LlOONS of S tab ih cy. 5 ern employment and skills policy - is to equip people to succeed, to be on their side, helping them become more skilled, adaptable and flexi-°dh P) ble for the job ahead rather than the old Tory way of walking awayimves tment an& rOWL. ° leaving people unaided to face change.
Successful manufacturing industries are vital to our future prosperity.
The Labour Government backs manufacturing: from launch investment for Airbus A38O Super Jumbo to the successful Manufacturing
Advisory Service helping l3, OOO of our smaller manufacturing businesses in its first year. In a third term we will continue to do so.
Public procurement is a big opportunity for business in Britain and l8The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Economy: Rising prosperity in an opportunity society the source of many jobs. We will promote a public procurement strat-Looking ahead, we are committed to a ten-year strategy on science egy that safeguards UK jobs and skills, under EU rules, to ensure thatand innovation that will continue to invest in our science and industriBritish industry can compete fairly with the rest of Europe. al base at least in line with trend GDP. Our ambition now is to raise the
UR’s total private and public sector investment in research and develBritain has some of the strongest capital markets in the world. We areopment, as a proportion of national income, from its current l.9 per determined they - and our financial services industry - shouldcent to 2.5 per cent by 2Ol4.
prosper. We will ensure that companies have the right framework of corporate governance and relationships with the institutions that investOur pharmaceutical and biotechnology industries are world leaders.
our pension funds and savings in them. We have created one of the world’s best environments for stem-cell research. We have now passed legislation to protect our researchers
§ Skills at workfrom the activities of animal rights extremists.
Our reforms to l4l9 education (see chapter 2) will raise the quality and quantity of apprenticeships and vocational education. We are nowAcross a range of environmental issues - from soil erosion to the depleputting in place a comprehensive and ambitious strategy to help every-tion of marine resources, from water scarcity to air pollution - it is one get on at work: clear now not just that economic activity is their cause but that these problems in themselves threaten future economic activity and growth.
* All adults to get free access to basic skills in literacy, language and numeracy. We will continue to work with the environmental goods and services
*A new national programme, working with employers, to ensure thatsector - which is already worth £25 billion to the economy to promote employees who did not reach GCSE standard (level 2) at school will getnew green technologies and industries in the UK and internationally, time off for free training up to level 2. and use the purchasing power of government to support environmen-
* A new partnership between government and employers to fund workplacetal improvement.
training at level 3 (technician level)
*A genuinely employer-driven training system - in every sector there will& Competition, planning and regulation be a Sector Skills Council determining the training strategy and a leadingCompetition is a driving force for innovation. Our competition regime edge Skills Academy. has been toughened with independent competition bodies and
*A nationwide system of advice - bringing together support on skills, jobsstronger penalties.
and careers - helping people to get on at work.
*A strong partnership with trade unions to boost workplace training includTo the benefit of business and household consumers we are liberalising anew TUC Academy and continued support for Union Learning Reps. ing the postal services market, while protecting the universal service at a uniform tariff.
@ Supporting science
The alliance of scientific research and business creativity is key to ourAs we said in our policy document Britain is Working, we have given continued prosperity. the Royal Mail greater commercial freedom and have no plans to
2O2lThe Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Economy: Rising prosperity in an opportunity society privatise it. Our ambition is to see a publicly owned Royal Mail fullyin processing cheques and other payments and, if necessary, will legisrestored to good health, providing customers with an excellent servicelate to ensure this early in the next Parliament.
and its employees with rewarding employment. We will review the impact on the Royal Mail of market liberalisation, which is being pro-There are many bank accounts that are lying dormant and unclaimed, gressively introduced under the Postal Services Act 2OOO and whichoften because people have forgotten about them or because the owner allows alternative carriers to the Royal Mail to offer postal services. has died. We will work with the financial services industry to establish a common definition and a comprehensive record of unclaimed assets.
We have reformed our energy markets to make them open and comWe will then expect banks, over the course of the Parliament, to either petitive. And we are a leading force in the campaign to make Europe’sreunite those assets with their owners or to channel them back into the energy markets the same. Our wider energy policy has created acommunity.
framework that places the challenge of climate change - as well as the need to achieve security of supply - at the heart of our energy policy. An effective planning regime protects the environment while promotWe have a major programme to promote renewable energy, as part ofing economic growth - and does so quickly and responsively. In the a strategy of having a mix of energy sources from nuclear power sta-next term, we will ensure that our planning system continues to protions to clean coal to micro-generators. tect the sustainability of local and regional environments - and we will continue to develop a regime which is simpler, faster and more responWe will only regulate where necessary and will set exacting targets forsive to local and business needs including the need to create jobs and reducing the costs of administering regulations. We will rationaliseregenerate our cities.
business inspections. The merger of the Inland Revenue and Customs and Excise will cut the administrative costs of tax compliance for small§ Fostering entrepreneurship businesses. There are 3OO, OOO more businesses now than in l997. We are tackling barriers to financing for small and growing businesses - especially
We will take further action in Europe to ensure that EU regulations areenterprises in deprived areas. Through Business Links we will offer proportionate and better designed. We strongly support the creation ofstart-ups, social enterprises and small businesses access to tailored an EU single market in services to match the single market in goods -intensive support and coaching. To foster the entrepreneurs of tomorand want an effective directive to provide real benefits to consumersrow, by 2OO6 every school in the country will offer enterprise educaand new opportunities to British business. We will protect our employ-tion, and every college and university should be twinned with a ment standards. In developing the directive we will want to avoid anybusiness champion.
undermining of our regulatory framework.
® Modern transport infrastructure
We will continue to work to protect the rights of consumers, bringingAn efficient transport system is vital to the country’s future, to our forward proposals to strengthen and streamline consumer advocacy. economy and to our quality of life. We welcome the freedom that addiWe look forward to action from the banking industry to remove delaystional travel provides and support the continuing development of a
2223The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Economy: Rising prosperity in an opportunity society competitive and efficient freight sector. Investment, better managementtransport planning, we will seek political consensus in tackling congesof road and rail, and planning ahead are vital to deal with the pressurestion, including examining the potential of moving away from the curon the system in a way that respects our environmental objectives. rent system of motoring taxation towards a national system of road-pricing.
We have doubled transport spending since l997 and will increase it year on year - committing over £l8O billion in public money betweenWe will give all over-6Os, and disabled people, free off-peak local bus now and 2Ol5 as well as private investment. The Eddington Reviewtravel and give local authorities the freedom to provide more generous will work with the Government to advise on how this investmentschemes. We will continue to support growth in bus provision includshould be targeted - in particular, where transport is vital to underpining innovation in school transport, with greater opportunity for local economic growth. authorities to control their bus networks where they are demonstrating value for money and taking strong measures to tackle congestion. To
We are now taking charge of setting the strategy for rail to further raisefacilitate improved public transport provision, we will explore giving the standard of service and reliability. We will examine options forPassenger Transport Executives greater powers over local transport.
increasing capacity, including a new generation of high-speed trains on intercity routes and a new life for rural branch lines as communityWe will continue funding local authorities and voluntary groups to railways. We are committed to continuing to work to develop a fundingmake cycling and walking more attractive. We are committed to reducand finance solution for the Crossrail project; and will look at the fea-ing child deaths and serious injuries on the road by 5O per cent, and we sibility and affordability of a new North-South high-speed link. will continue to work to reduce dangerous driving, especially drink driving and uninsured driving. We will work with industry to make
We will support light-rail improvements where they represent valuetravel on public transport safer and more secure.
for money and are part of the best integrated transport solution. To that end, we are working with cities across the country and have com-Government will continue to support technological innovation to mitted £52O million to Manchester for Metrolink. We will support thereduce carbon emissions such as the hydrogen fuel-cell buses in continuing upgrade of the London Underground and the extension ofLondon. We will explore the scope for further use of economic instruthe East London line. ments as well as other measures to promote lower vehicle emissions.
Major investment is planned to expand capacity on the Ml, M6 andWe will continue to support air travel by implementing the balanced
M25. We must also manage road space better. We are examining thepolicies set out in our aviation white paper. We are committed to using potential benefits of a parallel Expressway on the M6 corridor. We willthe UK’s 2OO5 presidency of the European Union to promote the introduce car-pool lanes for cars with more than one passenger oninclusion of aviation in the EU’s emissions trading scheme.
suitable roads and explore other ways to lock in the benefit of new capacity. We will complete the introduction of Traffic ManagementFor shipping, our introduction of the tonnage tax has led to a trebling
Officers to keep traffic flowing. Because of the long-term nature ofin size of the fleet since l997. We want more ships to fly the British
2425The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Economy: Rising prosperity in an opportunity society flag, to boost jobs and training, and to increase shipping and porti Fairness at work capacity. Since l997, the Labour Government has introduced new rights for people at work and new opportunities for trade unions to represent
® Opportunity for alltheir members. We see modern, growing trade unions as an important
We are determined to spread the benefits of enterprise to every com-part of our society and economy. They provide protection and advice munity in the country. Every regional economy has different strengths, for employees, and we welcome the positive role they have played in and Regional Development Agencies now play an essential role indeveloping a modern model of social partnership with business repreregional economic development. sentatives. The Labour Party has agreed a set of policies for the workplace (the Warwick Agreement) and we will deliver them in full. They. will be good for employees and for the economy.
‘Our economy has grown in every; We have introduced, for the first time, an entitlement for every quarter under this Government. employee to four weeks’ paid holiday, and we propose to extend this by making it additional to bank holiday entitlement.
We have given local authorities a direct incentive to promote local® Promoting equality at work business creation, allowing them to keep up to £l billion over threeA strong economy draws on the talents of all. We have extended legisyears of increased rate revenues to spend on their own priorities. lation to protect people from discrimination at work to cover not only
The Local Enterprise Growth Initiative will work through localgender, disability, race and ethnicity but also religion and sexual orienauthorities to remove barriers to enterprise in the most deprivedtation and - from 2OO6 - age. Labour has transformed legal rights for areas of England. disabled people. We will empower disabled people further by joining up services and expanding personalised budgets.
In l997, many parts of our towns and cities were suffering from deeply entrenched and multiple disadvantage. To tackle this we estabWe will take further action to narrow the pay and promotion gap lished a ten-year programme, the New Deal for Communities, between men and women. The Women and Work Commission will empowering local communities - and this is already deliveringreport to the Prime Minister later this year.
improvements in education outcomes and crime reduction.
We will implement the National Employment Panel’s report on measNo area in our country should be excluded from the opportunity toures to promote employment and small business growth for ethnic get ahead, to benefit from improving public services, and to be secureand faith minorities. We will take forward the Strategy for Race and safe. We will maintain our commitment to tackling issues ofEquality to ensure that we combat discrimination on the grounds of worklessness, low skills, crime, poor environment and health in ourrace and ethnicity across a range of services. The Equalities Review poorest neighbourhoods. reporting to the Prime Minister in 2OO6 will make practical
2627The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Economy: Rising prosperity in an opportunity society recommendations on the priorities for tackling disadvantage and pro-industry to create a sustainable long-term future for the fishing commoting equality of opportunity for all groups. munities of the United Kingdom. We have reformed the Common
Fisheries Policy and will continue to protect the marine environment
§ Thriving rural areasand ensure fish stocks and their exploitation are set at sustainable levels.
Since l997, Labour has made it more difficult to close rural schools, put in £75O million to support rural post offices and introduced aWe will introduce the Animal Welfare Bill as soon as possible in the
5O per cent rate relief on village shops. Through our £5l million Ruralnew Parliament.
Bus Subsidy Grant we have delivered over 2,2OO new bus services in rural areas this year. The choice for 2OlO
The Conservatives are the party of high interest rates, high inflaWe set targets for the creation of affordable homes in rural areas, whichtion, mass unemployment and house repossessions. Their taxwe have now exceeded. We will explore how to ensure a proportion ofand-spend promises do not add up; and they would cut £35 all new housing development is made available and affordable to localbillion from public investment. With new Labour, Britain can residents and their families. seize the opportunities of globalisation, creating jobs and prosperity for people up and down the country. We can only do so if
Because of our success in achieving extensive reforms in the Commonwe build a clear sense of shared national economic purpose, not
Agricultural Policy (CAP), 2OO5 will be the first year for decades whenjust around economic stability but also investment in infrastrucfarmers will be free to produce for the market and not simply for sub-ture, skills, science and enterprise. The choice is to go forward to sidy. We will continue to push for further reform of the CAP in theeconomic stability, rising prosperity and wider opportunities next Parliament, starting with the sugar regime. with new Labour. Or go back to the bad old days of Tory cuts, insecurity and instability.
We will continue to promote the competitiveness of the whole food sector, and assure the safety and quality of its products. We will introduce an explicit policy for schools, hospitals and government offices to consider local sourcing of fresh produce. We will continue to improve the environmental performance of agriculture, rewarding every farmer in England for environmental protection and enhancement work through our new Stewardship schemes. We will also promote biomass, bio-fuels and non-food crops. We will work to tackle diffuse water pollution through addressing impacts across water catchments without the costs falling on water customers.
Under difficult circumstances, Labour is working with the fishing
2829The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Britain forward not back
BritainEducation is still our number one priority. In our first term, for walewe transformed recruitment, training and methods of teaching, with record results in primary schools. In our second
Chapter 2term we have driven fundamental reform in secondary proviEd uc ation: More childrension - more teachers and support staff, more money, special-. ist schools and the Academies programmes. Our plan now is maki ng the gradeto tailor our education system to individual pupil needs, with
Fo rwa rd to pe rsona I ised lea mn j n FS4, parents supporting teachers and support staff in further rais-. ing standards. That means music, art, sport and languages as not back to mass fai urewell as English and maths in primary school; a good secondTTary school for every child, with modern buildings and excel4l997: 42nd in the World Education Lea guelent specialist teaching; catchup support for all children who need it; the guarantee of a sixth-form place, apprenticeship
2OO5: Third best in the world for literacy at ageor further education at l6; sufficient quality and quantity in ten and fastest improving for mathshigher education. At each stage we send a clear message - every child has a right to a good education, but no child has
2OlO: Every l6year-old offered school, college, the right to disrupt the education of other children.
training or apprenticeship
M@ The new Labour case
For generations our country has been held back by an education system that excelled for the privileged few but let down the majority.
Every child can and should be able to fulfil their potential. We will achieve this by uniting our commitment to equal opportunities for all children with a reform programme which gives every child and young person, from pre-school to sixth-form or apprenticeship and beyond, the personalised package of learning and support they need. In a third term, we will entrench high expectations for every child, ensure the flexibility of provision to meet all needs and make parents true partners as we aim for the highest ever school standards.
@ Every pupil with better teaching
There is no greater responsibility than teaching the next generation.
Head teachers, teachers and support staff deserve support and
3O3lEducation: More children making the grade respect. There are now over 28, OOO more teachers and lO5, OOO more support staff than in l997; graduate teacher applications are up 7O per cent; average salaries are up by more than 3O per cent. The remodelling of the school workforce is benefiting staff and helping to tailor provision to pupil need. We will now go further - to intensify inservice training for teachers, to widen further routes into teaching, to help more teachers and pupils get the benefit of the range of support staff
‘Our y) / an nN OW l. S tonow working in schools, from learning mentors to music and arts specialists. The goal is clear: every pupil with extra support in their.. weakest subjects and extra opportunities in their strongest.
tat or Our c ucationWe want to see every pupil mastering the basics. If they are not mas-
°°°tered by ll, there will be extra time in the secondary curriculum to get
SVS tem to individualthem right: schools will be judged on how pupils do in English and maths at the ages of ll, l4 and l6.
pupil needs, Wl th paren tSWe want every pupil to be stretched, including the brightest, so we will develop extended projects at Alevel, harder Alevel questions to chalSU (D yD ortin 2 tea ch ers an dlenge the most able, and give universities the individual module marks
-as well as overall grades - of Alevel students.
support S taff in further@ Every school with more money and effective leadership
Since l997, school funding has risen by £l, OOO per pupil. Education ee9spending that was 4.7 per cent of national income in l997 will rise to
TAILS wn ZL S tandards °5.5 per cent this year. We will continue to raise the share of national income devoted to education. And we will continue to recognise the additional needs of disadvantaged pupils. We will also ensure fundamental reform in the way the money is spent. Funding will be allocated on a multi-year timescale. There will be a dedicated national schools budget set by central government, with a guaranteed per pupil increase for every school. Heads and governors will be in control. Successful schools and colleges will have the independence to take decisions about how to deploy resources and develop their provision. Schools
33The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Education: More children making the grade will work together to raise standards. New provision will be created§ Enriching primary schools where standards are too low or innovation is needed. Local authoritiesInternational studies show that our ten-year-olds are the third highest have a vital role in championing the parent interest and providing sup-achievers in literacy in the world and the fastest improving in maths.
port services. Three-quarters of llyear-olds now reach high standards in reading, writing and maths. We will intensify our literacy and numeracy proA strong, effective governing body is essential to the success of everygramme to help an extra 5O, OOO pupils achieve high standards at age ll, school and governors must be given support to help them play thisreaching our targets of 85 per cent of pupils succeeding at the basics.
role. We will allow more flexibility in the structure of governing bodies, including the ability to have smaller governing bodies, of tenAll primary school children will have access to high-quality tuition in members or less, to streamline management while strengthening thethe arts, music, sport and foreign languages. We have set aside funds position of parents. for this purpose, working with head teachers to develop support programmes and modernise the school workforce.
§ Parents as partners
Our aim for the education system is to nurture the unique talents ofWe have abolished infant class sizes of more than 3O, and almost all every child. But children and schools do best with real and effectiveprimary schools have gained improved facilities since l997. We will parental engagement. Parents should have the information andnow upgrade primary schools nationwide in a l5year Building support they need to encourage their children, from the first readingSchools for the Future programme, including under-fives and childbook to the key choices they make at l4 and l6. And parents shouldcare facilities where needed. Primary schools will become the base for be central to the process of assessing school performance and drivinga massive expansion of outof-school provision (see chapter 6).
improvement, as well as their vital role in promoting good behaviour and raising the quality of school meals (see chapter 4). Foundation schools operate within the local family of state schools, and are funded in the same way as others, but manage their own assets and
All schools should have good home-school links, building on the newemploy their staff directly. We will allow successful primary schools, like school and pupil profiles. Some schools are using ICT to make con-secondary schools, to become foundation schools by a simple vote of tact between parents and schools easier and better for both sides. Wetheir governing body following consultation with their parents.
will encourage all schools to follow suit.
Every secondary school an independent specialist school
Ofsted now actively seeks the views of parents when undertakingWe want all secondary schools to be independent specialist schools with inspections. Ofsted will be given new powers to respond to parentala strong ethos, high-quality leadership, good discipline (including school complaints and where necessary to close failing schools or replace fail-uniforms), setting by ability and high-quality facilities as the norm.
ing management.
The way to achieve this is not a return to the llplus or a free-for-all on admissions policies. It is to ensure that independent specialist
3435Education: More children making the grade schools tailor education to the needs, interests and aptitudes of each pupil within a fair admissions system.
There are over 2, OOO specialist schools - schools which teach the entire national curriculum and also have a centre of excellence. Their results
C°°are improving faster than those of non-specialist schools. We want eee We will e Vl tre VlC h hi EZ hevery secondary school to become a specialist school and existing specialist schools will be able to take on a second specialism. Over time all
°specialist schools will become extended schools, with full programmes expectations for everyof after-school activities.
h / a.. deh. b I. Every part of the country will benefit, over fifteen years, from the
CU6] P YOUL€ Le fl CXlU wyBuilding Schools for the Future programme. This is a once in a generation programme to equip the whole country with modern secondary
O yf provi Sl2 on to mee tal ]education facilities, open five days a week, ten hours a day.
Good schools will be able to expand their size and also their influence needs and Ma ke pare 4) ts- by taking over less successful schools. We will develop a system to create rights for successful schools to establish sixth-form provision
°where there is pupil and parent demand, extending quality and choice true partners as Wwe aim jorfor local students.
th ehl h es t ever § ch O olBritain has a positive tradition of independent providers within the
4state system, including church and other faith schools. Where new educational providers can help boost standards and opportunities in a
KY t an d. ard. S >locality we will welcome them into the state system, subject to parental
°demand, fair funding and fair admissions.
We strongly support the new Academies movement. Seventeen of these independent non-selective schools are now open within the state system; their results are improving sharply, and 5O more are in the pipeline. Within the existing allocation of resources our aim is that at least 2OO Academies will be established by 2OlO in communities where
37The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Education: More children making the grade low aspirations and low performance are entrenched. schools; for others, it will be in special schools. Parents should have access to the special education appropriate for their child. It is the role
We will encourage more small schools and boarding schools as ways ofof local authorities to make decisions on the shape of local provision, in helping the most disadvantaged children. We will make sure schools inconsultation with local parents.
deprived areas receive the resources they need. To enable all young people to enjoy the opportunities previously enjoyed by the few, we are& No more dropping out at l6 developing a nationwide week-long summer residential programmeThe historic problems of our education system at l4plus have been an for school students. We support partnership between the state and pri-academic track that has been too narrow and a vocational offer too weak.
vate sectors to bridge the unhealthy historic divide between the two.
We are determined to raise the status and quality of vocational educa-
§ Good disciplinetion. Beyond the age of l4, GCSEs and Alevels will be the foundation
Every pupil has the right to learn without disruption; no teacher shouldof the system in which high-quality vocational programmes will be be subject to abuse or disrespect. We have given head teachers theavailable to every pupil. Designed in collaboration with employers, powers needed to maintain discipline and the highest standards ofspecialised diplomas will be established in key areas of the economy, conduct. Violent behaviour, including the use of knives will not be tol-leading to apprenticeships, to further and higher education and to jobs erated. We are also working with schools and teacher organisations towith training. We will review progress on the development of the l4l9 implement a zero tolerance approach to lower-level disruption. Thecurriculum in 2OO8.
number of places in outof-school units has almost doubled, and the quality of provision has been enhanced. We will give head teachersWe will not let economic disadvantage stand in the way of young peowithin each locality direct control of the budgets for outof-schoolple staying in education beyond the age of l6. We have rolled out provision, so they can expand and improve it as needed. We willEducational Maintenance Allowances, providing lower income stuencourage more dedicated provision for disruptive and excludeddents with a £3Oa-week stayingon allowance. We believe that everypupils, including by charities and voluntary groups with expertise inone up to the age of l9 should be learning, so we will expand this area, and no school will become a dumping ground forsixth-form, college and apprenticeship places, and ensure that all l6such pupils. to l9year-olds in employment get access to training.
Parents have a duty to get their children to attend school. We haveWe believe that every l6- to l9year-old should have dedicated superintroduced parenting orders and fines and will continue to advocatevision and support, including in the further education sector. We will truancy sweeps. support sixth-form colleges and expect FE colleges to have dedicated centres for l6- to l9year-olds.
§ Special educational needs
Children with special educational needs require appropriate resourcesFurther education is vital to vocational lifelong learning. Achieving a and support from trained staff. For some this will be in mainstreamtransformation of FE colleges requires both our increased investment
3839The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Education: More children making the grade and serious reform. Every FE college will develop a centre for voca-The number of PhD students in the UK has risen by nearly lO, OOO tional excellence, and we will establish new skills academies led bysince l997, and we are carrying through a 3O per cent increase in averleading entrepreneurs and employers from the relevant skill sectors. age PhD stipends to make doctoral research still more attractive to
Sir Andrew Foster’s review will help shape the reform process. high-flyers.
& Children’s TrustsWe will incentivise all universities to raise more charitable and private
Ofsted reports show that local government is continuing to improvefunding for student bursaries and endowments.
the vital services on which schools and families rely. Education and social services should collaborate to help youngsters, especially theThe choice for 2OlO most vulnerable, achieve their potential. Local government should beUnder their last government the Conservatives spent more on the champion of parents and high-quality provision, including specialunemployment and debt interest than on education. Their prineeds education, school transport, and other support services. We areority now is to take at least £l billion from state schools to subreforming local education authorities to form Children’s Trusts to pro-sidise private education for the privileged few. In addition they vide seamless support to children and families and work in partner-would allow a free-for-all in school admissions - including an ship with the private and voluntary sectors. extension of selection - for five- and llyear-olds, cap the number of pupils who can succeed at GCSE and Alevel, and reduce
§ World-class higher education, open to allplaces in higher education. The choice for 2OlO is forward with
Universities are critical to Britain’s future prosperity. We need a bigger, new Labour: pupils with quality and opportunity through the better higher education system. We are investing £l billion more in thesystem from three to l8; parents with the confidence that where science base, and increasing public spending on higher education bythere is no improvement there will be intervention; teachers
34 per cent in real terms. But graduates and employers must also playknowing that quality will be supported and rewarded; and their part. Our funding reforms will generate £l billion of extra fundsemployers with a system that gets the basics right and provides by 2OlO; the abolition of upfront fees and the creation of grants willthe skills that industry needs. Or back with the Tories to an eduhelp poorer students. A quarter of the income from the new studentcation system designed to look after the few but fail the many.
finance system will go to bursaries for students from poorer families.
The maximum annual fee paid by students will not rise above £3, OOO
(uprated annually for inflation) during the next Parliament.
As school standards rise we maintain our aim for 5O per cent of young people to go on to higher education by 2OlO. Two-year foundation degrees in vocational disciplines have a key part to play.
PhD students are vital to universities and the nation’s research base.
4O4lThe Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Britain forward not back
BritainToday, there is less chance of being a victim of crime than for for walemore than 2O years. But our security is threatened by major organised crime; volume crimes such as burglary and car
Chapter 3theft, often linked to drug abuse; fear of violent crime; and
Crime and secu rity: anti-social behaviour. Each needs a very different approach.
seeWe are giving the police and local councils the power to tackle
Safe communities, secure bordersanti-social behaviour; we will develop neighbourhood policFo rwa rd to nei gh bou rhood polic jng, ing for every community and crack down on drug dealing and. 8. hard drug use to reduce volume crime; we are modernising not back to rising crimeour asylum and immigration system; and we will take the necTTessary measures to protect our country from international l979-l997: Recorded crime had almost doubledterrorism.
2OO5: Almost l3, OOO more police officersli The new Labour case
2OlO: Anei ghbourhoo d policin g team inThe modern world offers freedoms and opportunities unheralded a; generation ago. But with new freedoms come new fears and threats to every communityour security. Our progressive case is that to counter these threats we need strong communities built on mutual respect and the rule of law.
We prize the liberty of the individual; but that means protecting the law-abiding majority from the minority who abuse the system. We believe in being tough on crime and its causes so we will expand drugs testing and treatment, and tackle the conditions - from lack of youth provision to irresponsible drinking - that foster crime and anti-social behaviour. In a third term we will make the contract of rights and responsibilities an enduring foundation of community life.
§ A neighbourhood policing team for every community
Overall crime as measured by the authoritative British Crime Survey is down 3O per cent - the equivalent of almost five million fewer crimes a year. Record numbers of police - almost l3, OOO more than in l997
- working with 4,6OO new Community Support Officers (CSOs), local councils, and the Crown Prosecution Service deserve the credit.
But local people want a more visible police presence and a role in
4243The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5 setting local police priorities. So our pledge is a neighbourhood policing team for every community. We will carry on funding the police service to enable it to continue to employ historically high numbers of police officers.
Hard-working police officers should be supported by professional and trained support staff. So a new £34O million a year fund will take CSO numbers up to 24, OOO - to work alongside the equivalent of an additional l2, OOO police officers freed up for frontline duties. And we will(q We°°hL ° work with representatives of police officers and other police staff to€ are £ twoIng L € po lCeé develop a modern career framework for the whole police team.
Not all problems need a 999 response, so a single phone numberand local councils the staffed by police, local councils and other local services will be available across the country to deal with anti-social behaviour and otherPD OWer tO ta C k / e an tl- S O Cl a / non-emergency problems.
® Empowering communities against anti-social behaviourbehaviour; We will develop
People want communities where the decent law-abiding majority are in charge. The experience of almost 4, OOO Anti-Social Behaviour°ee
Orders, nearly 66, OOO Penalty Notices for Disorder, and the closure ofNeg hb ourhood policin ZL jor over l5O crack houses shows that communities can fight back against crime. We are ready to go further. every communityBD)
Parish Council wardens, like those working for local authorities, will be given the power to issue Penalty Notices for Disorder for noise, graffiti and throwing fireworks. Victims of anti-social behaviour will be able to give evidence anonymously. Local people will be able to take on
‘neighbours from hell’ by triggering action by councils and the police.
We have reformed housing and planning legislation to ensure that councils plan for the needs of genuine Gypsies and travellers. But with rights must go responsibilities so we have provided tough new powers
44The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Crime and security: Safe communities, secure borders for councils and the police to tackle the problem of unauthorised sites.® Cutting crime through cutting drug dependency
Communities know that crime reduction depends on drug reduction.
Excessive alcohol consumption fuels anti-social behaviour and vio-There are now 54 per cent more drug users in treatment and new lence. The new Licensing Act will make it easier for the police andpowers for the police to close crack houses and get drug dealers off our councils to deal with pubs and clubs that cause problems. Local coun-streets. We will introduce compulsory drug testing at arrest for all cils and police will be able to designate Alcohol Disorder Zones to helpproperty and drugs offenders, beginning in high-crime areas, with pay for extra policing around city centre pubs and clubs, with newcompulsory treatment assessment for those who test positive.
powers to immediately shut down premises selling alcohol to under-Offenders under probation supervision will be randomly drug tested age drinkers, and bans from town and city centres for persistentto mirror what already happens to offenders in custody.
offenders. Police will be able to exclude yobs from town centres for 24 hours when they issue a Penalty Notice for Disorder. From 2OO6, the Serious Organised Crime Agency will bring together over 4, OOO specialist staff to tackle terrorism, drug dealers, people traffickers and other national and international organized criminals. And
‘We believe mn being tough on crimein consultation with local police authorities and chief constables we will restructure police resources in order to develop strong leadership, and lts Causes SO We will expand drugsstreamline all police support services, and focus upon national and. regional organised crime.
testing and treatment, and tackle the
@ Reducing the use of guns and knives conditions eee that fos ter crime andDangerous weapons fuel violence. We have banned all handguns, introduced five-year minimum sentences for those caught with an antis octal behaviour’unlawful firearm and raised the age limit for owning an air gun. Now we will go further. We will introduce a Violent Crime Reduction Bill to restrict the sale of replica guns, raise the age limit for buying knives to
We will continue to overhaul our youth justice system and improvel8 and tighten the law on air guns. Head teachers will have legal rights
Young Offender Institutions. We will make more use of intensive comto search pupils for knives or guns. Atrisk pubs and clubs will be munity programmes, including electronic tagging and tracking to dealrequired to search for them and we will introduce tougher with the most persistent young offenders, and will increase the num-sentences for carrying replica guns, for those involved in serious knife ber of parents of young offenders getting help with their children’scrimes and for those convicted of assaulting workers serving the public.
behaviour. We will increase, by at least a half, programmes targeted at young people most at risk of offending and will expand drug-treat-® Punishing criminals, reducing offending ment services for young people. As court sentences have got tougher, we have built over l6, OOO more prison places than there were in l997. The most high-risk violent
4647The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Crime and security: Safe communities, secure borders offenders will now be detained in custody indefinitely and our 2OO3We will overhaul laws on fraud and the way that fraud trials are conCriminal Justice Act confirmed that life sentences must mean life for theducted to update them for the 2lst century and make them quicker most heinous murders. Where significant new evidence comes to lightand more effective.
we have abolished the ‘double jeopardy’ rule so that serious criminals who have been unjustly acquitted can be tried again. And we will introduce much tougher penalties for those who cause death by careless driv-‘Overall crime eee is down 3O per cent - ing or who kill while driving without a licence or while disqualified..._.
the equivalent of almost five million
We will tackle reoffending. By 2OO7 every offender will be supervised; after release; we will increase the use of electronic tagging; and we willfewer CrIMeS A year?
test the use of compulsory lie detector tests to monitor convicted sex offenders. Our new National Offender Management Service will ensure that every offender is individually case-managed from beginning to end® Backing the victim of their sentence, both in and out of custody - with increased effort tar-The legal system must dispense justice to the victim as well as the geted on drugs treatment, education and basic skills training to reduceaccused. We have invested to create a modern, self-confident prosecureoffending. Voluntary organisations and the private sector will betion service. With new powers and new technology to bring more offered greater opportunities to deliver offender services and we willoffenders to justice more speedily and effectively. We will improve the give local people a greater say in shaping community punishment. way the courts work for victims, witnesses and jurors by:
® Making sure crime does not pay* Building a nationwide network of witness and victim support units that
Those who commit crimes should not profit from them. Already weprovide practical help.
have introduced laws that enable the courts to confiscate the assets and* Expanding specialist courts to deal with domestic violence and specialist property of drug dealers and other major criminals. We will enable theadvocates to support the victims of such crime and of other serious crimes police and prosecuting authorities to keep at least half of all the crimi-like murder and rape.
nal assets they seize to fund local crime-fighting priorities. And we will develop new proposals to ensure that criminals are not able to profitWe will extend the use of restorative justice schemes and Community from publishing books about their crimes. In addition we will supportJustice Centres to address the needs of victims, resolve disputes and magistrates effectively in fighting crime and improve the enforcementhelp offenders to make recompense to victims for their crimes.
of court decisions - including the payment of fines.
Legal aid will be reformed to better help the vulnerable. We will ensure
Where a defendant fails to turn up for court without good excuse, the pre-independent regulation of the legal profession, and greater competisumption should be that the trial and sentencing should go ahead anyway. tion in the legal services market to ensure people get value for money.
We will tackle the compensation culture - resisting invalid claims, but upholding people’s rights.
4849Crime and security: Safe communities, secure borders
Following consultation on the draft Bill we have published, we will legislate for a new offence of corporate manslaughter.
® Migration: The facts
Over seven million people entered the UK from outside the EU in
2OO3: of whom l8O, OOO came here to work and over 3OO, OOO to study, with the rest coming here as business visitors and tourists. People from overseas spent almost £l2 billion in the UK, and overseas students
(q°°alone are worth £5 billion a year to our economy. At a time when we
We priz e the liberty ofhave over 6OO, OOO vacancies in the UK job market, skilled migrants are contributing lOl5 per cent of our economy’s overall growth.
the individual, but thatSince l997, the time taken to process an initial asylum application has been reduced from 2O months to two months in over 8O per cent of
Mm e an S pro te C tin 2 L h ecases. The number of asylum applications has been cut by two-thirds since 2OO2. The backlog of claims has been cut from over 5O, OOO at
°°°°the end of l996 to just over lO, OOO. There are 55O UK Immigration law-abidin ZL majorityOfficers posted in France and Belgium to check passports of people boarding boats and trains, and Airline Liaison Officers and overseas
°°entry clearance staff are helping to stop l, OOO people a day improperfrom the minority whoiy entering the UK, bhP)® Building a strong and diverse country a USE O. € SY, A) tem. For centuries Britain has been a home for people from the rest of
Europe and further afield. Immigration has been good for Britain. We want to keep it that way.
Our philosophy is simple: if you are ready to work hard and there is work for you to do, then you are welcome here. We need controls that work and a crackdown on abuse to ensure that we have a robust and fair immigration system fit for the 2lst century that is in the interests of Britain.
5lThe Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Crime and security: Safe communities, secure borders
§ A points system for immigrationfingerprints, backed up by a national register and rolling out initially
We need skilled workers. So we will establish a points system for thoseon a voluntary basis as people renew their passports.
seeking to migrate here. More skills mean more points and more chance of being allowed to come here. BS Fair rules
We can and should honour our obligations to victims of persecution
We will ensure that only skilled workers are allowed to settle long-termwithout allowing abuse of the asylum system. We will:
in the UK, with English language tests for everyone who wants to stay permanently and an end to chain migration.* Fast-track all unfounded asylum seekers with electronic tagging where necessary and more use of detention as we expand the number of detenWhere there has been evidence of abuse from particular countries, thetion places available.
immigration service will be able to ask for financial bonds to guarantee* Remove more failed applicants. We have more than doubled the number of that migrants return home. We will continue to improve the qualityfailed asylum seekers we remove from the UK compared to l996. By finand speed of immigration and asylum decisions. Appeal rights forgerprinting every visa applicant and prosecuting those who deliberately non-family immigration cases will be removed and we will introducedestroy their documents we will speed up the time taken to redocument civil penalties on employers of up to £2, OOO for each illegal immigrantand remove people and will take action against those countries that refuse they employ. to cooperate. By the end of 2OO5, our aim is for removals of failed asylum seekers to exceed new unfounded claims.
@ Strong and secure borders
While the Tories would halve investment in our immigration services,® Tough action to combat international terrorism we would invest in the latest technology to keep our borders strongWe know that there are people already in the country and who seek to and secure. enter the United Kingdom who want to attack our way of life. Our liberties are prized but so is our security.
By 2OO8, those needing a visa to enter the UK will be fingerprinted. We will issue ID cards to all visitors planning to stay for more than threePolice and other law enforcement agencies now have the powers they months. Over the next five years we will implement a new electronicneed to ban terrorist organisations, to clampdown on their fundraising borders system that will track visitors entering or leaving the UK. and to hold suspects for extended questioning while charges are brought. Over 7OO arrests have been made since 2OOl. Wherever posAcross the world there is a drive to increase the security of identitysible, suspects should be prosecuted through the courts in the normal documents and we cannot be left behind. From next year we are intro-way. So we will introduce new laws to help catch and convict those ducing biometric ‘ePassports’. It makes sense to provide citizens withinvolved in helping to plan terrorist activity or who glorify or condone an equally secure identity card to protect them at home from identityacts of terror. But we also need to disrupt and prevent terrorist activitheft and clamp down on illegal working and fraudulent use of publicty. New control orders will enable police and security agencies to keep services. We will introduce ID cards, including biometric data liketrack on those they suspect of planning terrorist outrages including
5253The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5 bans on who they can contact or meet, electronic tagging and curfew orders, and for those who present the highest risk, a requirement to stay permanently at home.
We will continue to improve coordination between enforcement agencies and cooperation with other countries so that every effort is madeC°° to defeat the terrorists. LV. (Z will wn troduce I D
The choice for 2OlOd°] d °b °°
Labour’s goals for 2OlO are clear. Overall crime down, the num-Can S ») NC. Uuingtometric ber of offenders brought to justice up, with a neighbourhood policing team in every community to crack down on crime andd. L l ti °° disorder and a modern criminal justice system fit for the 2lstata UeINL erp rints, century. And to reduce threats from overseas: secure borders.
backed up by ID cards and a crackdown on abuse of our immi-baC ked up by a nN a tl on a / gration system. The Conservative threat is equally clear. Savage cuts to our border controls, ‘fantasy island’ asylum policies and..
a return to the days of broken promises on police numbers andve ZL is te Yr and YO llin ZL Out crime investment.
initially on a voluntary basis as people renew hei their passports.
54The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Britain forward not back iis inThe NHS is being restored to good health: more doctors, more n va Walynurses, better facilities. Waiting times are coming down and the survival rates for the biggest killers are improving. The
Chapter 4revolution in quantity of care must be matched by a revoluOur N HS: Free to all, personal to eachtion in quality of care. With equal access for all and no charges. for operations. That means new types of health provision,
Fo rwa rd to pe rsonalised healthcaremore say for patients in how, where and when they are treatfor all of us, not back to two-tiered, and tackling ill-health at source.
healthcareM@ The new Labour case
Healthcare is too precious to be left to chance, too central to life l997: l2hour waits in Accident and Emergency, chances to be left to your wealth. Access to treatment should be based,, on your clinical need not on your ability to pay. This means defeatin asyyty to pay. g and waiting more than l8 months forthose who would dismantle the NHS. But it also means fundamentaloperationsly reforming the NHS to meet new challenges - a more demanding
2OO5: Less than four hours in A&E for 97 percitizenry with higher expectations, major advances in science,... and medical technology, changes in the composition and needs of the cent of patients. Virtually no one waitingpopulation.
more than nine months for an operation
2OO8: No one waiting more than l8 weeks from¢..
6. We promised to revive the NHS; referral to treatment. No hidden waits.
Free choice of hospitalwe have. In our third term we will make.> the NHS safe for a generation.
So our aim is an NHS free to all of us and personal to each of us. We will deliver through high national standards backed by sustained investment, by using new providers where they add capacity or promote innovation, and most importantly by giving more power to patients over their own treatment and over their own health.
5657The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5
We promised to revive the NHS; we have. In our third term we will make the NHS safe for a generation.
@ New investment
NHS spending has doubled since l997, and will triple by 2OO8; already we have an extra 27, OOO doctors in post or in training andC°°
79, OOO extra nurses; over lOO new hospital building projects underThe N. ] j S is b elnl ZL way; 5OO, OOO more operations a year. We are proud of the dedication and commitment of NHS staff. We have widened the responsibilitiesdd hi h.
of nurses and pharmacists, paramedics and porters, creating healthres toreto ge OOea L ° services more convenient for patients.
‘Together with our organisational reforms, the investment is paying off. m Ore docto YS, m Ore nurs ES,
The maximum time that people waited for operations in l997 was well over l8 months. Now virtually no one waits longer than nineb e (ter Ja Cl h tl e AY cee months, and this year it will fall further to six months. For a heart operation or for cataract removal no one is waiting longer than three°° months; 97 per cent of people wait less than four hours in AccidentThe re volution wn and Emergency before treatment, admission or discharge. And speedier treatment saves lives. Death rates from heart disease are down by°
27 per cent since l996; from cancer by l2 per cent. quan lity of Care Must
We will do even better. For too long waiting times have only countedbh d bL° the time after diagnosis. We will be the first Government to include all€ matc€"yy a Yvevo ution waiting times in this calculation, including waiting for outpatient intments and for test results. There will be no hidden waits. So:: hh.) appointments and for test results. Theree noen waits. Sown qua ity of care.
* By the end of 2OO8, no NHS patient will have to wait longer than a maximum of l8 weeks from the time they are referred for a hospital operation by their GP until the time they have that operation. This would mean an average wait of nine to ten weeks.
*We will commit to faster test results for cervical smears.
*We will go further in improving cancer waiting times.
58The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Our NHS: Free to all, personal to each
All this with equal access for all, free at the point of need with nohalving the numbers of quangos - freeing up £5OO million for frontcharges for hospital operations. line staff. Given the pace of change within medical services we will ensure that it is possible for the NHS to change the way in which it
We have tightened the rules on NHS operations so that ‘health tourists’organises its services as quickly as possible. Further streamlining measnow have to pay for treatment. ures will allow us to release an additional £25O million a year for frontline services by 2OO7.
‘One principle underpins Our reforms _In the light of the findings of the Shipman Inquiry, we will strengthen.. clinical governance in the NHS to ensure that professional activity is putting patients centre stage. fully accountable to patients, their families and the wider public.
Following the recommendation of the Health Select Committee, we
And ex tending patient power andwill require registration of all clinical trials and publication of their findings for all trials of medicinal products with a marketing authorisachoice is crucial to achieving this.’tion in the UK.
M@ Innovation and reform
We will deal with the challenge of MRSA. Infections acquired in hos-‘To achieve our goals we need to expand and develop different types pital are not new. The time to destroy MRSA was in the early l99Os -of provision. We will put more money into the frontline, develop pracwhen only five per cent of the bacteria were resistant to antibiotics. Attice-based commissioning, and so ensure that family doctors have that time the Tory government did not even keep records about themore power over their budgets. We will create more services in priincidence of MRSA and were forcing hospitals to contract out clean-mary care. We will build on our family doctor service with more GPs ing services. We were the first government to publish statistics on thedelivering more advanced services more locally; new walkin centres problem. Now, thanks to the tough measures we have already taken, for commuters; specialised diagnostic and testing services; compreincluding the end to a two-tier workforce for contracted-out cleaninghensive outof-hours services; high-street dropin centres for chiservices, MRSA rates are on their way down. But there is still someropody, physiotherapy and check-ups. And we will continue to way to go. We all want clean hospitals, free of infection. We have alreadyexpand the role of nurses. These changes will result in more quality, reintroduced hospital matrons and given them unprecedented powersconvenience and care.
to deal with cleanliness and infections in their wards; we shall reinforce this by consulting on new laws to enforce higher hygiene standardsExpansion in NHS capacity will come both from within the National
Health Service - where we will develop the NHS Foundation Trust
And by strengthening accountability and cutting bureaucracy, we shallmodel and the new freedom for GPs to expand provision - as well as ensure that the new investment is not squandered. We are decreasingfrom the independent and voluntary sector, where specialist services the numbers of staff in the Department of Health by a third, and areare available at NHS standards to meet NHS need.
6O6lOur NHS: Free to all, personal to each
To help create an even greater range of provision and further improve convenience, we will over the next five years develop a new generation of modern NHS community hospitals. These stateof-the-art centres will provide diagnostics, day surgery and outpatients facilities closer to where people live and work.
We shall continue to encourage innovation and reform through the
‘He a / thC are l. S to Ouse of the independent sector to add capacity to, and drive contestability within, the NHS. We have already commissioned 46O, OOO opera-. tions from the independent sector, which will all be delivered free - prec LOUS tO be left tOwith equal access for all based on need, not the ability to pay.
°Whenever NHS patients need new capacity for their healthcare, we chanc e 9 LOO C é€ nN tral tO lifewill ensure that it is provided from whatever source.
& Empowering patients: choosing not waiting ch ances LO be lefi c LO VY OurOne principle underpins our reforms - putting patients centre stage.
And extending patient power and choice is crucial to achieving this.
ZU e a / th see Thi Sme an SWe shall be embedding both throughout the NHS. So:.* By the end of 2OO8, patients whose GPs refer them for an operation will defeatin LZ tho Se v4 6) ho TOU Idbe able to choose from any hospital that can provide that operation to
NHS medical and financial standards. There will be the choice of a con-
°9vement time and place for a non-urgent operation for example a location dismantle the NHS. closer relatives,
*We will expand capacity and choice in primary care too. Where GPs’ lists are full we will expand provision by encouraging entrepreneurial GPs and other providers to expand into that location.
* By 2OO9 all women will have choice over where and how they have their baby and what pain relief to use. We want every woman to be supported by the same midwife throughout her pregnancy. Support will be linked closely to other services that will be provided in Children’s Centres.
* In order to increase choices for patients with cancer we will double the
63The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Our NHS: Free to all, personal to each investment going into palliative care services, giving more people thebehavioural as well as drug therapies.
choice to be treated at home.*We shall provide safeguards for the few people with long-term mental health problems who need compulsory treatment coupled with appropriBy October 2OO5 we will have recruited more than l, OOO new NHSate protection for the public. We shall also strengthen the system for protectdentists and will have increased the number of dental school places bying the public from offenders who have served their sentence but may still
25 per cent. We will undertake a fundamental review of the scope andpose a threat because they have a serious psychopathic disorder.
resourcing of NHS dentistry.
§ Living healthier lives
We will provide more information and advice. Through NHS Direct, People want to take responsibility for their own health outside the
Health Direct, interactive TV, print media and the internet we will giveNHS as well as within it. They have the right to expect help from govmore convenient access to much better information about health andernment. The killer diseases of the heart and the many forms of cancer health services, including the performance of doctors and hospitals. are often the product of poor diet, lack of exercise and above all smoking. By 2OlO we aim to reduce deaths from coronary heart disease and
& Empowering patients: strokes by 4O per cent from l997. And we want death rates from canlong-term conditions and social carecer to be cut by 2O per cent.
We will promote the integration of health and social care at local level, so that older people and those with long-term conditions can retain§ Healthy choices for children their independence. We will continue to provide healthcare free inWe will start the drive for better health early - at school. We have long-term care establishments, and provide the right framework foralready extended the provision of free fruit to all 4- to 6year-olds at schemes such as equity release which make staying at home an attrac-school. We will invest more in renovating and building new kitchens as tive option. We will develop our policy of community matrons for thosewell as investing an extra £2lO million in school meals, guaranteeing with severe conditions, helping to keep people out of hospital by pro-that at least 5Op per meal is spent on ingredients in primary schools, viding better care at home. and at least 6Op in secondary schools. We are introducing an independent School Food Trust, better training for dinner ladies and
*Wé will develop personalised budgets in social care where people can decideOfsted inspection of healthy eating. We will legislate for tougher stanfor themselves what they need and how it should be provided. dards of nutrition for school meals and will encourage schools to teach
*We shall extend case-management for the l8 million people with long-termmore about healthy eating. We will ban certain products that are high conditions. We will treble the investment in the Expert Patients Programme, in fat/salt content from school meals and ensure that fresh fruit and and help many more patients take control of their own care plans. vegetables are part of every school meal. We will encourage secondary
* Almost a third of people attending GP surgeries have mental health prob-schools to keep pupils on the premises to ensure that they have a lems and mental health occupies approximately one third of a GP’s time. healthy meal. We will ensure that all school children have access to a
So we will continue to invest in and improve our services for people withschool nurse.
mental health problems at primary and secondary levels, including
6465The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Our NHS: Free to all, personal to each
® Healthy choices for alloperations so that those who can afford to pay thousands of
We will put in place a simple system of labelling to make it easier forpounds can push ahead of those who cannot. As well as ending busy shoppers to see at a glance how individual foods contribute to athe founding principle of the health service, this would take healthy balanced diet. We will help parents by restricting further themore than £l billion out of the system to subsidise those who advertising and promotion to children of those foods and drinks thatcan afford to pay. For the rest of us, the Tories would abandon are high in fat, salt and sugar. waiting-list targets and allow a return to the l8month waits that were their NHS legacy. The choice is forward with new
We recognise that many people want smoke-free environments andLabour to a health system with patients in the driving seat, free need regulation to help them get this. We therefore intend to shift theto all and personal to each of us. Or back with the Tories to longer balance significantly in their favour. We will legislate to ensure that allwaits, and to a health system where treatment depends not on enclosed public places and workplaces other than licensed premisesyour condition but on your bank balance.
will be smoke-free. The legislation will ensure that all restaurants will be smoke-free; all pubs and bars preparing and serving food will be smoke-free; and other pubs and bars will be free to choose whether to allow smoking or to be smoke-free. In membership clubs the members will be free to choose whether to allow smoking or to be smoke-free.
However, whatever the general status, to protect employees, smoking in the bar area will be prohibited everywhere.
These restrictions will be accompanied by an expansion of NHS smoking cessation services to encourage and support smokers to improve their own health by giving up smoking
Starting with the poorest areas of the country we will introduce health trainers to help people maintain their healthy choices. By 2OlO, through this activity we plan to reduce the health inequalities that exist between rich and poor.
All this will be free at the point of need.
Today’s Conservatives want to do what not even Margaret
Thatcher would countenance - introducing charges for hospital
6667The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Britain forward not back meltOur priority since l997 has been to tackle pensioner poverty.
n va WalyNearly two million pensioners have been lifted out of absolute poverty as a result of Labour’s measures, which are now getChapter 5ting on average an extra £2, OOO a year to the poorest third. Our
Older people: Secu re today, priorities now are to uid a national consensus for tomorrow’s pensioners, combining public and private pension prepared for the futureschemes to build security in retirement, and to extend the
Forward to new opportunitiesquality of life of older people.
in old age, not back to povertyThe new Labour case and insecurityBy 2O2O there will be more people over the age of 8O than under the age of five. For a progressive government there can be no compromise of our duty to today’s pensioners. But while we fulfil that duty we must l997: 2.8 million pensioners in poverty, also see old age as a time of independence and opportunity. On penthe poorest living on £69 per weeksions, our aim is a system that provides security and decency for all,.;; which encourages and rewards saving, and is financially sustainable.
2OO5: Minimum income for pensionersAnd because, more than anything, people need certainty to plan for of £lO9 per weekthe future we will seek a national consensus - cross-party, cross-gener-. tion - for long-tform.
2OlO: A long-term settlement for pensionsanon ene
® Tackling pensioner poverty:
The success of the Pension Credit
In l997, 2.8 million pensioners were living in poverty - with the poorest expected to live on just £69 per week. Labour’s Pension Credit now means that no pensioner need live on less than £lO9 per week. It rewards saving and helps over three million pensioners, with women in particular benefiting. We will increase Pension Credit in line with earnings up to and including 2OO7O8.
All pensioners have benefited from improved universal benefits like the state pension, the Winter Fuel Payment (now worth £3OO per year for the over-8Os), help with council tax and free TV licences for the over-75s. This year, all households expected to pay council tax that
6869Older people: Secure today, prepared for the future include anyone over 65 will receive £2OO towards the cost of council tax, and the following year there will be free, off-peak local bus travel in
England for the over-6Os.
Millions of pensioners have benefited from our fuel poverty programme. Our goal is to eliminate fuel poverty for vulnerable groups by
2OlO, and for all by 2Ol5.
¢°°® Pensions for the generation of tomorrow
On pens tons '9 Our almThe generation retiring in the future will be different in many ways from its predecessors. Their jobs will have been different; the expectal. Ss a S Vy Ste m th a t PD Yr OU l, de e Kytions of women will be transformed; their retirements will be longer and healthier. We have begun to lay the foundations for the pensions system of tomorrow, for example, by: introducing the State Second Pension to
S e CUYl cy an d d. e C en cy forensure carers, low earners and disabled people have a chance to build up a decent pension for the first time; encouraging automatic enrol-
°ment into company pension schemes; creating the Pension Protection all 5) whic h e VlC OU'VA Les andFund; enabling pensioners for the first time to work part time and draw down their occupational pension; as well as offering an increased state
°°pension or lump sum for those deferring their pension. We will work to rewards S avin ZL 9 and lSincrease the proportion of pension fund trustees nominated by scheme members, along with access to proper training. We will keep this issue
°° ll°bl, P)under review, with consultation in the expectation of further progress fi nNancia AY SUS taina€ °to 5O per cent member-nominated trustees.
We need to forge a national consensus about how we move from a pension system designed for today’s pension problems to one that is right for tomorrow’s. We appointed the Pensions Commission to look into the future of pensions and its second report is due in autumn
2OO5. We are clear about the goals of a reformed system. It must tackle poverty, provide everyone with the opportunity to build an adequate retirement income, and be affordable, fair and simple to understand.
In particular it must address the disadvantages faced by women.
7lThe Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Older people: Secure today, prepared for the future
B® New rights, new choicescoaches to gifted and talented young people. We will also work with
Many older people want to carry on working in their 5Os and 6Os. Thevoluntary organisations to help expand grandparent and toddler welfare state should be there to help them. Older people with theirgroups across the country.
skills and experience are potentially an enormous resource. That is why we set up the New Deal for the Over-5Os, with over l5O, OOO older® Support across the generations people helped back to work. The challenge of balancing work and family applies to parents but also to people looking after an elderly or sick relative - now one in five
We also need to put the force of the law on the side of older peopleadults. Since the introduction of the right to request from their who wish to continue working. Companies will no longer be able toemployer flexible working arrangements, a million parents have force people to retire before the age of 65 except where specificallychanged their working hours. We are consulting on a similar right for justified. All employees over the age of 65 will have the right to requestcarers of elderly or sick relatives.
of their employer that they be allowed to carry on working. After five years we will review whether there should be any fixed retirement ages. The choice for 2OlO
The Tories are the party of pensioner poverty. When they left;; office in l997, one in four pensioners was living in poverty and
“. provide everyone with thethe poorest pensioners were expected to get by on just £69 a;; week. They would phase out the Pension Credit and abolish the opportunity to build an adeq uateState Second Pension, hurting most those most in need. When the one thing we all need is certainty, the Tories have admitted re tirement income 5 and be affordable 5they have absolutely no plans for how to fund their pensions pol-.. icy beyond four years. The choice is whether we go forward with fair and A) imple to unders tand.’new Labour with today’s pensioners provided for and poverty falling, a national consensus on fair and sustainable long-term reform and the policies to give older people enhanced rights and
We will give older people greater choice over their care. For every olderchoices. Or back with the Tories to rising levels of pensioner person receiving care or other support, we want to offer transparent, poverty and unending insecurity for tomorrow’s pensioners.
individual budgets which bring funding for a range of services, including social care, care homes, and housing support such as adaptations, maintenance and cleaners together in one place. We will pilot individual budgets for older people by the end of this year.
We will make the most of the opportunities of an older population by creating a new programme for older people to be mentors and
7273The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Britain forward not back meltIt is impossible to fulfil the potential of our country - never n va Walymind promoting social mobility and equality of life chances - unless every child gets the best possible start in life.
lhildthe biblin life
Chapter 6Government does not bring up children, but it must support
Families: Choice and supportparents in their key role. We will help parents balance work and family, expand paid leave, deliver the biggest ever expanat work and at homesion in childcare and end child poverty in a generation.
Forward to family prosperity,. lTM@ The new Labour case not back to family povertyStrong families are the bedrock of a strong society. Children cannot be the forgotten constituency of politics; parents put their children first l997: Childcare places for only one in eightand they deserve support from government. Yet fear of seeming to,..‘nanny’ has in the past meant British law and culture have not supchildren under eightported parents and children. Government cannot shirk its responsibil2OO5: Universal, free, part-time nurseryities. Our starting point is that for children to come first parents need education for all three- and four-year-oldsto be given choices: a tax and benefit system to raise family incomes and tackle child poverty; legal changes to promote a healthy balance
2OlO: Universal, affordable childcare for three-between work and family; and services built around the needs of chilto l4year-olds and a Sure Start Children’sdren. Our third-term commitment - not a nanny state but a family-.. friendht.
Centre in every communitynene’y governmen
® Tackling child poverty
We will end child poverty, starting by halving it - both in terms of relative low-income and in terms of material deprivation - by 2OlOll.
Work is the best anti-poverty strategy. Tailored help, especially for lone parents, is key but we are also committed to making work pay - with a guaranteed income of at least £258 per week for those with children and in full-time work.
The benefits system needs to support all children, and those in greatest need the most. That is the rationale for universal child benefit and targeted tax credits, and why we have committed to increasing the
7475The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Families: Choice and support at work and at home
Child Tax Credit at least in line with earnings up to and includingyear. Over the longer term we will increase free provision to 2O hours.
2OO7O8. By October 2OO5, families with children will be on average
£l,4OO per year better off, and those in the poorest fifth of the popu-For older children up to the age of l4 extended schools, working in lation on average £3,2OO a year better off compared to l997. Labour’spartnership with the private and voluntary sectors, will offer affordChild Trust Fund creates a nest egg for newborns that they can accessable outof-school childcare from 8am to 6pm throughout the year, at age l8. It is the world’s first example of a government ensuring thatwith a range of arts, music, sport and study support.
all children grow up with a financial stake. We are determined to see it grow and are consulting on making payments at age seven and at secWe will help families with incomes of up to £59, OOO a year with their ondary school age, in addition to those made at birth. childcare costs through more generous Working Tax Credit, including help for those using a nanny or au pair. Parents using childcare supported by their employer will be able to get a tax break worth up to
‘Over 35O, OOO mothers and 8O, OOO£5O a week each. We are working with the GLA and the Mayor to.. bring down the cost of childcare in London.
fathers each year are using new rights to;;;& Creating time paid maternity and paternity leave, Over 35O, OOO mothers and 8O, OOO fathers each year are using new rights to paid maternity and paternity leave. Parents consistently say their top priority is more choice of whether to stay at home with their
We are supporting local authorities in the radical reform of children’sbaby in the first year of its life. We will therefore increase paid materniservices, above all to ensure there is one professional with leadty leave to nine months from 2OO7 - worth an extra £l,4OO - with the responsibility for each vulnerable child. We will also ensure that serv-goal of achieving a year’s paid leave by the end of the Parliament while ices are designed to meet the additional needs of disabled childrensimplifying the system for employers. We want to give fathers more and their families. Opportunities to spend time with their children, and are consulting on how best to do this including the option of sharing paid leave. We have
§ Universal childcarealready introduced the right to request flexible working to parents of
Since l997, the Government has funded an additional 52O, OOOchildren under six and nearly a million parents have benefited. We sustainable childcare places and now every family with a three- orneed to balance the needs of parents and carers, with those of employfour- year-old child has access to a free nursery place. By 2OlO, we willers, especially small businesses. We are consulting on extending the create 3,5OO Sure Start Children’s Centres for children under fiveright to request flexible working to carers of sick and disabled adults as years - five in every constituency - a universal local service that bringsa priority, and also on whether we should extend the right to parents of together childcare and services for families. By 2OlO, all parents ofolder children.
three- and four-year-olds will have increased rights to flexible, free, part-time nursery provision for l5 hours a week over the whole school
7677The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5
® Supporting family life
Common sense, as well as research, says that children need to be able to depend on the love and support of both parents. The financial support we are giving families, along with new rights to flexible working and access to childcare, are all designed to support family life.
Government can and should support those public and voluntary agencies that support families and parents. We are examining the development of a new information service - Parents Direct - to provide advice on all aspects of children’s services and parental entitlements. rq Chl i} dren canno t be
For those parents who do separate or divorce, both have a responsibility for a meaningful relationship with their children where that is safe. hte°
We are introducing reforms to minimise conflict and encourage conL eOrg O tten CONS It LUency ciliation by greater and early use of mediation. We stand by the principle that absent parents should make a fair contribution to the cost ofyf PD L° PDPD ents; Of politics; parents put the upkeep of their children, and we are committed to tackling the backlog of Child Support Agency claims as efficiently and fairly as°°° possible. We also need to ensure court orders on access are enforcedtheir C hildre 4) first and according to the best interests of the child, which ideally gives both parents an important role. t hdDpt
& Increasing home ownership
A decent home is crucial to family well-being. Homeownership hasiLP) increased by over one million with Labour and by the end of our thirdrom gi Overnm en c.
term we aim for it to have risen by another million to two million.
Rising house prices in many areas of the country have made it difficult for people on lower incomes to get a foot on the housing ladder. So we have raised the stamp duty threshold from £6O, OOO to £l2O, OOO for residential properties, exempting an extra 3OO, OOO homebuyers from stamp duty every year.
We will continue to respond to the challenges of local housing markets across the UK. In the South we will invest in extra housing in London
78The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Families: Choice and support at work and at home and the wider South East, with particular emphasis on the Thamesthe ability to start building homes again and bring empty homes back
Gateway and other growth areas. In the Midlands and North we willinto use. And we will end the ‘take it or leave it’ approach to social renttackle the problems of low demand and abandonment that threatening by expanding choice-based lettings nationwide.
communities.
We want to widen the opportunity to own or part-own, especially forThe Tories are all talk and no action on family policy. They more young people and those tenants who rent in the private or pub-opposed our increases in maternity and paternity pay and the lic sector. Our comprehensive plan includes: introduction of flexible working rights. Even the measures they have proposed wouldn’t come in until 2OO9, by which time the
*A new Homebuy scheme offering up to 3OO, OOO council and housingTories are committed to making deep cuts in spending. The association tenants the opportunity to buy part of their home, increasingchoice is forward with new Labour to a universal, affordable, their equity over time tf they wish. good-quality childcare, a million more homeowners, more
*A First Time Buyers Initiative to help over l5, OOO first-time buyers whochoice for all parents and an end to child poverty. Or back to the could not own or part-own a home without extra help. We will use surplusrisky economic policies of a Tory government that would let public land for new homes, enabling the buyer to take out a mortgage forfamilies sink or swim whatever the pressures they face.
only the building.
* Strengthening existing home ownership schemes, such as the Key Worker
Living scheme and Shared Ownership.
§® Social housing
The increased supply and quality of social housing is central to
Labour’s belief in mixed, sustainable communities.
Since l997, we have cut the number of substandard social-rented homes by one million; installing 3OO, OOO new kitchens, 22O, OOO new bathrooms and 72O, OOO new boilers and central heating systems into council homes. By 2OlO we will ensure that all social tenants benefit from a decent, warm home with modern facilities.
For too long, tenants have had little say over where they live. In a third term, Labour will offer greater flexibility and choice for those who rent. We will increase the annual supply of new social homes by 5O per cent by 2OO8, an extra lO, OOO homes a year, and give local authorities
8O8lThe Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Britain forward not back meltGlobalisation means that events elsewhere have a direct n va Walyimpact at home. So we will pursue British interests by working with our allies to make the world a safer, fairer place. This
Chapter 7means reforming Europe. It means fighting terrorism and
Intern ational policy: A stron gerstopping the spread of weapons of mass destruction. It means
77blmodernising our armed forces. And it means using our leadcountry ina secure, sustaina eing role in the G8, EU, the Commonwealth and UN to proand just worldmote global action on climate change and poverty.
Forward to international leadership, The new Labour case not back to isolation andDomestic interests and international action are entwined more than ever before. Action on drugs, terrorism, people trafficking, AIDS, clipowerlessnessmate change, poverty, migration and trade all require us to work with other countries and through international organisations. The best l997: Marginalised in Europe, aid in declinedefence of our security at home is the spread of liberty and justice dBto.. overseas. In a third term we will secure Britain’s place in the EU and at anosnia In ruinsthe heart of international decision-making. We will always uphold the
2OO5: Aid doubled, elections in lraq andrule of international law.
Afghanistan, Kosovo and Bosnia peaceful;_
® Making Europe work better for Britain
2OlO: A strong Britain in a reforming Europe, We are proud of Britain’s EU membership and of the strong position
3OO million out of poverty, global actionBritain has achieved within Europe. British membership of the EU on climate changebrings jobs, trade and prosperity; it boosts environmental standards, social protection and international clout. Since l997 we have gone from marginal players, often ignored, to leaders in the European
Union. Working hard with Labour MEPs, we are determined to remain leaders. Outside the EU, or on its margins, we would unquestionably be weaker and more vulnerable.
The EU now has 25 members and will continue to expand. The new
Constitutional Treaty ensures the new Europe can work effectively, and that Britain keeps control of key national interests like foreign policy, taxation, social security and defence. The Treaty sets out what the
8283The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5International policy
EU can do and what it cannot. It strengthens the voice of national par-before drawing up a comprehensive statement spelling out the rights liaments and governments in EU affairs. It is a good treaty for Britainand responsibilities of British travellers abroad. This will include the and for the new Europe. We will put it to the British people in a refer-help that people can expect from their government in times of need.
endum and campaign whole-heartedly for a “Yes’ vote to keep Britain a leading nation in Europe.® Helping make you more secure
We have worked closely with the US and other nations to combat the
We will also work to reform Europe. During Britain’s EU presidencythreat of terrorism in Afghanistan and in Iraq. The threat of the prolifthis year, we will work to promote economic reform, bear down oneration of chemical, biological and nuclear weapons - and their use by regulation; make progress in the Doha development trade round; bringrogue states or terrorist groups - is a pressing issue for the world today.
closer EU membership for Turkey, the Balkans and Eastern Europe; We have worked with the US to ensure that Libya has given up its and improve the focus and quality of EU aid so it better helps the poor-WMD, and we will continue with France and Germany to ensure that est countries. Tran does not develop nuclear weapons. In North Korea we will support the multilateral approach of the Six Parties talks. We will continue
We will continue to lead European defence cooperation. We will buildto strongly support the peace process between India and Pakistan, and stronger EU defence capabilities, in harmony with NATO - the cor-back moves to resolve the long-running dispute over Kashmir. And we nerstone of our defence policy - without compromising our nationalwill work to put an end to the international network of trade in ability to act independently. We will ensure the new EU battle groupsweapons of mass destruction. Labour has already introduced a strict are equipped and organised to act quickly to save lives in humanitari-regime to control the export of conventional weapons, and we led an crises. moves for EUwide measures. We will work actively to secure an international treaty on the arms trade.
On the euro, we maintain our common-sense policy. The determining factor underpinning any government decision is the national econom-& Promoting human rights, peace and democracy ic interest and whether the case for joining is clear and unambiguous. We need to be tough on terrorism and its causes. The threat of terrorThe five economic tests must be met before any decision to join can beism and the danger to British citizens is proven, not just by September made. If the Government were to recommend joining, it would be putllth but by repeated attacks in Europe and around the world. So we to a vote in Parliament and a referendum of the British people. cannot sit back and hope that we will be unaffected. It is right that we do everything in our power to disrupt terrorist networks, and to chal-
® Protecting British interests and British citizens abroadlenge the conditions that help terrorism to breed.
We will continue to provide effective support to British businesses and trade unions abroad, and we will continue to improve our ability toThe UN Charter proclaims the universal principles of human rights respond quickly to international crises and disasters which affect ourand democracy. In an uncertain world they are not only right in citizens. The Foreign Office already provides a wide range of servicesprinciple, they are important guarantees of our national security and for British people in difficulty overseas, and we will consult widelyprosperity too.
8485International policy
There have been major strides forward in recent years: in Indonesia,
¢°°Afghanistan and many parts of Africa and Latin America, democracy
Domestic interests andi being extended
°°°We mourn the loss of life of innocent civilians and coalition forces in international action arethe war in Iraq and the subsequent terrorism. But the butchery of
Saddam is over and across Iraq, eight million people risked their lives dhto vote earlier this year. Many people disagreed with the action we took entwinemore Lanin Iraq. We respect and understand their views. But we should all now. unite to support the fledgling democracy in Iraq. British troops should
AOA fi before. A C tion Onremain in Iraq under a United Nations mandate as long as the democratically elected government there wants them. They will continue to
°train Iraqi security forces to take responsibility for their own future.
drugs, terrorism, people
We welcome the wider process of democratic reform across the
°°°Middle East, and we will work with our allies to encourage and proL YA} lcR ing 3 Al D S, climat €mote economic and political change.
h.. We strongly support the peace process between Israel and Palestine.
Cang Cy yy overly, m ig rationResolution of the conflict is crucial to peace in the region and the wider. world. The conference held in London in March 2OO5 has started the an d (va d. ‘Aal ] require Uu S toprocess of helping a democratic government in Palestine build security and prosperity. We will work tirelessly to bring about a peace settle-
°ement in which a viable and independent state of Palestine lives zorr zwith O the r C OUnN tvzesalongside a safe and secure Israel.
d hh °°]® Supporting our armed forces anL YO Ugin ternationaBritain’s armed forces are among the best in the world. They are able to play a key role in advancing our interests and values. We want to
°°5)keep it that way.
Organisations.
We are immensely proud of the bravery, skill and dedication our armed forces have demonstrated in Afghanistan, Iraq, Sierra Leone, the
87The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5International policy
Balkans and elsewhere across the world. They are a force for good. Weprosperous world. We support the reform of the Security Council so it will never commit forces to battle unless it is essential; but when theybecomes more representative and has a stronger focus on conflict preare committed they will have the investment, strategy, training andvention. We support the recommendation of the Secretary-General’s preparation they need. That is one reason we have given the armedHigh-level Panel for a Peace-building Commission to assist countries forces the biggest sustained increase in funding since the end of theemerging from conflict and to develop mechanisms to enhance conCold War. But we also know that modern demands on our armedflict prevention. We will press for more radical reform of the UN forces are changing. That is why reform and modernisation are essen-humanitarian system, so it is better equipped to saves lives. We will also tial. A reduction in the number of infantry battalions, made possiblepress for reform of the World Bank and IMF to improve transparency, because of the improved security situation in Northern Ireland, hasgive more say to developing countries and, with the EU better focus allowed extra resources for the vital support services such as signals, their efforts on the poorest countries, particularly in Africa.
engineers, intelligence and logistics units - the parts of the army most under pressure. This is essential to allow our infantry soldiers to be§ Climate change and Africa fully supported when they go into action on our behalf. We will contin-Britain has the chair of the G8 this year. We will use the summit for two ue with the investment and reform that make our fighting forces theparticular purposes.
most flexible and effective in the world.
First, climate change is the one of the most pressing challenges that the
We are also committed to retaining the independent nuclear deterrentworld faces. We will continue to lead internationally on climate change, and we will continue to work, both bilaterally and through the UN, toand to strive for wider acceptance of the science and the steps needed urge states not yet party to non-proliferation treaties, notably theto combat the problem. We will look beyond Kyoto and promote an
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, to join. international dialogue to reach agreement on the long-term goals and action needed to stabilise the level of greenhouse gases in the atmos-
®@ Veteransphere. We will also work for effective international action to adapt to
Labour has always recognised the sacrifice and bravery of our service-the impacts of climate change.
men and women. That is why we were the first government to appoint a Minister for Veterans Affairs. This has enabled us to put veterans’The UK has already met its obligations under the Kyoto Protocol. We affairs at the heart of decision-making at the Ministry of Defence. remain committed to achieving a 2O per cent reduction in carbon dioxLabour has also put more money than ever before into veterans’ issues, ide emissions on l99O levels by 2OlO, and our review of progress this including £27 million of Lottery funding over the last two years. Wesummer will show us how to get back on track. A 6O per cent reduction will continue to give priority to veterans’ affairs as we mark 6O yearsby 2O5O remains necessary and achievable.
since the end of the Second World War.
We will continue to promote and develop renewable energy sources, to
§ Reforming the United Nationsseek high standards of energy efficiency in the public and private secThe UN is crucial to our efforts to build a more secure and moretors, and to support emissions trading in Europe and beyond.
8889The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5International policy
Secondly we will focus on Africa and the global fight against poverty. i Fair trade
We also know that without fairer trade rules and private investment,
We have more than doubled aid since l997. We have cancelled thepoor countries will not generate the growth needed to lift themselves debts of the poorest countries and are now pushing others to followout of poverty. We will press for the conclusion of an ambitious trade our lead and offer lOO per cent debt relief for the poorest. We are prouddeal that will completely open markets to exports from poorer counto have established a Department for International Development, withtries; for further reform of rich countries’ agricultural subsidies, a clear mission to reduce poverty. Now, for the first time ever the UKincluding the EU’s Common Agricultural Policy and a 2OlO timetable has a clear timetable - 2Ol3 - for achieving the UN target of O.7 perto end agricultural export subsidies. We do not believe poor countries cent of national income devoted to development. Globally we areshould be forced to liberalise. We will allow them to sequence their pressing for a doubling of aid backed by getting international agree-trade reforms, so they can build their capacity to compete globally.
ment to an International Finance Facility as supported by the
Commission for Africa. The choice for 2OlO
In l997 the Tories had left Britain isolated in Europe, overseas
But aid will not be successful without conflict prevention, good gover-aid had declined and we lacked any coherent vision of our place nance and zero tolerance of corruption. We will work for faster repatriin the world. With Labour, a strong Britain will force internaation of stolen assets from UK financial institutions, ratification of thetional terrorism into retreat and help spread democracy and
UN Convention on corruption, and more open and accountablefreedom around the world. We will be leaders in a reformed reporting of revenues from oil and mining - that so often fuel localEurope, and, with others, make significant progress towards conflicts. Our commitment is to the people of the developing world; raising a billion people out of extreme poverty. We will fight for a our contract is with their governments for reform. But if poor coun-new global agreement on climate change, an arms trade treaty, tries are committed to good governance and poverty reduction weand a trade deal that makes trade work for the many, not just then believe they should be in control of their own policies. We will endthe few. Our armed forces will continue to be the best in the the practice of making aid conditional on sensitive economic policyworld. The alternative is to go back to the Tories with their record choices, such as trade liberalisation and privatisation. of cuts in aid and defence and their policies of tearing up the Social Chapter, and marginalising Britain in Europe and
With this leadership and extra money, we can now work to ensure allthe world.
children go to school, and millions of people in Asia and Africa suffering from AIDS, tuberculosis and malaria have access to treatment. In particular, we will press for an international agreement on universal access to AIDS treatment by 2OlO and for all people in poor countries to have access to free basic healthcare and education.
Our long-term aim is to help lift a billion people out of poverty.
9O9lThe Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Britain forward not back
BritainArts, culture and sport are thriving around Britain - enrichfor Walying individual lives and transforming communities, towns and cities. They are important in their own right -- as nourishment
Chapter 8for our imagination or a source of plain enjoyment and our
Quality of life: Excellence for alllocal environment should be a source of pride. We will work to
Forwa rd to Olympic gold not backimprove the quality of life of every community in Britain.
to cuts in sport and culturell The new Labour case
We believe in the inherent value of arts, culture and sport. Our towns and cities are being energised by sports and culture and as they are l992-l997: Arts spending cut by l3 per centregenerated the quality of life for all is transformed. As we build on this in real termschange, our progressive challenge is to broaden participation as widely as possible, making the links between sport and health, and culture and
2OO5: Free entry to national museums, andwell-being. We must combine the broadest base of participation with visits up 75 per centthe ability for the most talented to progress to the very top. Our third
2Ol2: An Olym pic legacy for Britainterm wil embed the expectation that every child and every adult have the maximum chance to develop their creative or sporting talents.
lM Creative cities
Art and culture are valuable for their own sake; they are also crucial to our national prosperity. Britain’s cultural industries now make up over eight per cent of our national income; and from computer games to the fine arts, British talent is gaining global recognition and generating real wealth. This is one of the fastest growing and fastest changing areas of the economy. And the transformation of our great cities is, in great part, a story of culture-led regeneration. We are proud of the record of Labour-led councils in leading this transformation, from
Gateshead to Greenwich.
To help young talent get the right start we will work to establish
Creative Apprenticeships. Through the National Endowment for
Science, Technology and the Arts (NESTA) we are funding the
Creative Pioneer Academy which will develop the entrepreneurial
9293The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Quality of life: Excellence for all skills of recent graduates with outstanding talents and original busi-§ Creative Sparks ness ideas - and for some there will be the offer of up to £35, OOO toOur aim is that everyone should have the opportunity to participate in start their own business. cultural life, and we want that involvement to start as early as possible.
Creative Partnerships, our programme of support for art in schools in
From 2OO6 we will provide £l2 million over two years to the Artsour most disadvantaged areas, has already reached over l5O, OOO chilCouncil England to promote leadership and management in the cul-dren. We will build on this approach by rolling out our new programme tural sector. We want to invest in high-flyers developing commercialCreative Sparks to guarantee that all children and young people will be and business skills, encourage the talents of leading ethnic minoritygiven the chance to experience the very best of culture every year.
figures and improve the links between arts and business.
§ Sport for all
§ Arts, culture and museumsOur aim is to increase participation in sport year on year. Central to
Since l997 we have increased funding for the arts by 73 per cent inthis is having modern, high-quality facilities close to where people live.
real terms. We will continue to support our finest artists and institu-£l.5 billion is being invested in sports facilities in every community.
tions to achieve world-class standards. By 2OO8 our aim is that almost everyone will be within 2O minutes of a good multi-sport facility.
Thanks to our policy of free admissions the number of people visiting formerly charging national museums and galleries has risen by 75 perGrassroots clubs are the lifeblood of sports in Britain, and week in, cent over three years. Many are first-time visitors, with the biggestweek out, they are sustained by an army of volunteers. Reform of Sport increases among children. England will continue, to reduce overheads and ensure that more money reaches the grassroots. We have put sports clubs at the foreVictorian City leaders left us a legacy of great local and regional muse-front of our investment plans with the £lOO million Community Club ums, and through our investment programme ‘Renaissance in theDevelopment Scheme and mandatory rate relief at 8O per cent for regRegions’, we are recreating them as centres of excellence. By 2OO8 weistered Community Amateur Sports Clubs already worth about £5 will have invested £l47 million in partnerships across the country, million. As we review the operation of the new licensing regime we will modernising museum collections, broadening access to new audiencesensure that there is not an unfair burden on local community groups, and providing a comprehensive service to schools. We will explore fur-including sports clubs.
ther ways to encourage philanthropy to boost the quality of our public art collections. Investment in school sports will ensure that by 2OlO all children will receive two hours high-quality PE or sport per week. Building on that,
We will legislate, as soon as time allows, to implement the findings ofwe pledge that by 2OlO every child who wants it will have access to a the Heritage Protection Review, which allows the public a greater sayfurther two to three hours sport per week.
in listing decisions.
Every child should have the chance to compete at school. We have
9495The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5 clamped down on the sale of playing fields: 96 per cent of schools in
School Sport Partnerships now hold at least one sports day or sports festival each year. All secondary schools will be expected to field teams in regular competitive fixtures. We will also establish individual and team rankings in all the main sports, with clear and transparent success criteria.
§ Sport in the community
‘To make it easier to get access to sports in your local area we will estab-(qce lish Sport Direct - a single point of access for sports in the UK. OneOur LOWNS and Cl IATAY website and one phone number will help you find out what’s going on in your area. Together with £l55 million from the Big Lottery Fund, b.. d b the Government will ensure that children who have had little access toarecing energ SeAy play facilities and those with a disability have much better access to safe, modern playgrounds. Sp Or t. AY an d Cu / ture an d
Building on the lessons of the Football Foundation, we will develop a
National Sports Foundation to bring resources from the private andaS they Are re Lene rated voluntary sectors together with public money to invest in grassroots sporting facilities. We will work with the Premier League and the FA to°° find innovative ways of assisting community sport, includingthe qd uality of life jor
Supporters Direct. Having passed the necessary legislation, we remain committed to completing the sale of the Tote to a Racing Trust.°P) all is transformed.
i The Olympics
Britain’s medal hauls at the Sydney Olympics in 2OOO and in Athens in
2OO4 were the best for over 8O years, and we maintained our position as one of the leading nations in the Paralympics. Now we are supporting the bid to bring the Olympics to London in 2Ol2. Our plans would bring regeneration to the East End of London and will leave lasting sporting, economic and cultural legacies. As we approach the
Olympics we will continue to invest in elite athletes through the
Talented Athlete Scholarship Scheme for young athletes. In addition
96The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Quality of life: Excellence for all we have launched 2Ol2 Scholarships worth around £lO, OOO a year§ Digital challenge each for our most talented l2- to l8year-olds. We will deliver our cross-government strategy for closing the digital divide and using ICT to further transform public services:
§ Libraries in the information age
Where they offer new services like childcare, after-school education* By 2OO6 every school supported to offer all pupils access to computers at for pupils, and IT learning our libraries are successful. We will develophome.
a strategy for the modernisation of our libraries which builds on the*A Digital Challenge for a local authority to be a national and internabest, strengthens library leadership, sharpens customer focus and har-tional pathfinder in universal digital service provision.
nesses local popular support. We will encourage further cooperation in*A new National Internet Safety Unit to make Britain the safest place in back-office functions and identify the best ways to improve our librarythe world to access the internet.
infrastructure.
& Copyright in a digital age
@ Public service broadcasting and the BBCWe will modernise copyright and other forms of protection of intellecWe support a strong, independent and world-class BBC with clearlytual property rights so that they are appropriate for the digital age. We defined public purposes at the heart of a healthy public broadcastingwill use our presidency of the EU to look at how to ensure content cresystem. We will replace the BBC Governors with a BBC Trust toators can protect their innovations in a digital age. Piracy is a growing ensure that the BBC’s governance and regulation is accountable to thethreat and we will work with industry to protect against it.
licence-fee payers to whom it belongs. The licence fee will be guaranteed for the whole of the ten-year Royal Charter that will take effect onFilm l January 2OO7. Channel 4 will continue to be a publicly owned broad-The strength of Britain’s film industry is a source of pride, and caster providing distinctive competition to the BBC. ITV and Five willemployment. We will continue to make the UK the right place to invest also be retained in our public service broadcasting system. in film production. We will legislate to provide new tax reliefs that will ensure support is delivered directly and efficiently to those who pro-
§ Digital switchoverduce films.
The success of satelite and cable television in driving takeup of digital shows how changes in technology bring real benefits - in terms ofWe will work with the UK Film Council to achieve a higher priority for greater choice, and increasingly, in access to services. Our aim is tofunding film festivals around the country, in particular for the make those benefits available to all. We will achieve digital switchoverEdinburgh Film Festival, the oldest in Britain.
between 2OO8 and 2Ol2 ensuring universal access to high-quality, freeto-view and subscription digital TV. This will happen region by§ The Lottery region, and we will make sure that the interests of elderly people andEvery single part of British life has been touched by the £l5 billion other vulnerable groups are protected. generated for good causes by the Lottery. Labour has made the Lottery more inclusive and more in tune with people’s priorities. We have
9899The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Quality of life: Excellence for all created the Big Lottery Fund and given it an explicit mandate to involveAll newly developed communities - such as the Thames Gateway people not just in setting strategy but also in awarding grants. OurDevelopment - will be built to high environmental standards on issues
Lottery Bill will give a duty and a power to every Lottery distributor tosuch as energy efficiency and water use, and we will develop a clear involve the public more radically in decision-making at every level. plan to minimise the impact of new communities on the environment.
From April 2OO6, all new homes receiving government funding will
By the end of 2OO5 we will put in place a new, national consultation onmeet the new Code for Sustainable Buildings and we will encourage the way that the National Lottery good causes proceeds are spent afterlocal authorities to apply similar standards to private homes.
the new Lottery Licence is awarded in 2OO9.
Through a Marine Act, we will introduce a new framework for the i The local environmentseas, based on marine spatial planning, that balances conservation,
The quality of our local environment is vital to our well-being and ourenergy and resource needs. To obtain best value from different uses of natural environment is a key part of our national heritage. our valuable marine resources, we must maintain and protect the ecosystems on which they depend.
The environment starts at the front door, and we have made action to improve the cleanliness of public spaces and communities a priority. The choice for 2OlO
The 2OO5 Clean Neighbourhoods and Environment Act will give localThe Tories have always neglected the arts, seeing them as an authorities and regulators the powers they have asked for to tackle lit-easy target for cuts. They do not understand the role that culture ter, graffiti, abandoned cars, fly-tipping, noise pollution and othercan play in the lives of individuals, in the futures of our towns environmental concerns. We will further crack down on environmentaland cities, and in the prosperity of our country. The choice is forcrime, minimising litter, cleaning up graffiti and tackling fly-tipping. ward with new Labour to more sport in schools, arts for all chilWe will extend kerbside collection of at least two types of recyclabledren and young people, and continued investment in culture. Or materials to all households in England by 2OlO. Polluters will have theback to the Tories and cuts of £2O7 million across culture, arts opportunity to invest in environmental remediation or new local envi-and sport.
ronmental projects rather than just pay fines. Rather than ‘polluter pays’ this new system would mean the ‘polluter improves’.
Britain’s beaches, rivers and drinking water are now of the highest ever quality. We have added 3O, OOO hectares to the green belt while exceeding our target of building 6O per cent of new houses on brownfield sites. We have established the first National Park in England since the l95Os.'To enhance our children’s understanding of the environment we will give every school student the opportunity to experience outof-classroom learning in the natural environment.
lOOlOlThe Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Britain forward not back
BritainIn our first two terms we enshrined a new constitutional setfor Walytlement between the nations of the United Kingdom. In our next term we will complete the reform of the House of Lords
Chapter 9so that it is a modern and effective revising Chamber. And we
Democracy: Power devolved, will devolve more power to local authorities and local comaoemunities, giving people real power over the issues that matter citizens empoweredmost to them.
Forward to reform and.. M@ The new Labour case decentral isation not bac k toWidening access to power is as important as widening access to wealth opportun ism and neglectand opportunity. National standards are important to ensure fairness.
But the best way to tackle exclusion is to give choice and power to those left behind. Our political institutions - including our own party - l979-l997: Power centralised to Whitehallmust engage a population overloaded with information, diverse in its l997-2OO5: Power devolved to Scotland, values and lifestyles, and sceptical of power. However, people are passionate about politics - when they see it affects them. So our challenge
Wales, Londonis to bridge the chasm between government and governed. Our third
2OlO: Stron ger local government, withterm will build upon our unprecedented programme of constitutional local communities able to makereform embedding a culture of devolved government at the centre and self-government in our communities.
the key decisions about their own neighbourhoods§ Building from the neighbourhood up
People want a sense of control over their own neighbourhood. Not a new tier of neighbourhood government, but new powers over the problems that confront them when they step outside their front door - issues like litter, graffiti and anti-social behaviour. That is why we will offer neighbourhoods a range of powers from which they can choose, including:
* New powers for parish councils to deal with anti-social behaviour.
* Powers for local people to trigger action in response to persistent local problems.
* Community funds for local neighbourhoods to spend on local priorities.
lO2lO3Democracy: Power devolved, citizens empowered
* New opportunities for communities to assume greater responsibility or even ownership of community assets like village halls, community centres, libraries or recreational facilities.
Good parish councils engage communities and make a real difference, so we will extend the right to establish parish councils to communities in London.
¢°°§ A vibrant civil society
Widening (4) CCes S LOWe believe that enterprises in the mutual and cooperative sector have an important role to play in the provision of local services, from health
PD OW er l. Ly a 5 l: m 79) O rt ant a 5to education, from leisure to care for the vulnerable. As democratic, not-for-profit organisations, they can help to involve local people in shaping the services they want, unleash creativity and innovation, creZU, denin 2 AaAcce AY AY tO We a / thate jobs and provide new services - especially in neighbourhoods where traditional services have failed local people in the past.
and opportunity. N, ationalWe have introduced a new legal form - the Community Interest
Company (CIC) - and want to support new enterprises. As a major
°stimulus to this sector, central government and local authorities will
S tandards are wmportan i, work with these ‘social enterprises’ wherever possible. Where services can be provided by mutuals, cooperatives or CICs to the required stan-
°P)dards of quality and value for money, they should be positively encourLO ENSUYE ie QUrness. aged to develop and be included in procurement policies. We will discuss with local authorities the best way to achieve this.
In a range of services the voluntary and community sector has shown itself to be innovative, efficient and effective. Its potential for service delivery should be considered on equal terms. We will continue to improve the context in which the gifting of time and resources to the voluntary sector takes place. We will reintroduce the widely supported reforms in the Charities Bill.
lO5The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Democracy: Power devolved, citizens empowered
We understand that often the spark for local innovation and changecommunity leadership role of local authorities working in partnership comes from one or two dedicated, visionary individuals. These people, with public, voluntary and private bodies.
sometimes dubbed ‘social entrepreneurs’, deserve our full support.
We will develop a framework of incentives and rewards, to recognise® Stronger leadership the special people in every community whose voluntary efforts trans-Strong local government requires strong leadership. We will ensure form the lives of others. that councils are organised in the most effective way to lead and support local partnerships and deliver high-quality services. We will
8 A better alternative for young peopleexplore giving people a more direct opportunity to express a view
We know that parents and young people think that there should beabout whether they would like to have a directly elected mayor. We will more things to do and places to go for teenagers. We will publish plansalso consult with city councils on the powers needed for a new generto reform provision in order to ensure that all young people have accessation of city mayors. And we will examine the case for simplifying the to a wider set of activities after the school day such as sport and thecurrent local government election cycle by moving towards ‘whole arts. We are determined that better provision will be allied to a strongercouncil’ elections every four years.
voice for the young themselves in designing and managing local provision. We will establish the first ever national framework for youth vol-§ Council tax under control unteering, action and engagement - a modern national youthLabour recognises the concerns that have been raised about the level community service, led by young people themselves - with an investof council tax. This year we have delivered the lowest council tax ment over the next three years of up to £lOO million with matchedincrease in over a decade through a combination of extra investment funding from business, the voluntary sector and the Lottery. and tough action to cap excessive increases.
® Councils: more freedom, less bureaucracyWe will continue to invest in local services with yearon-year increases
Strong communities ultimately require strong local government. Wein grants to local councils, and will not hesitate to use our capping will give councils further freedoms to deliver better local services, sub-powers to protect council taxpayers from excessive rises in council tax.
ject to minimum national standards, with even greater freedoms for top-performing councils. We will reduce unnecessary bureaucracy byWe remain concerned that many council taxpayers are not claiming cutting both the cost of inspection and the total number of inspec-reductions in their council tax bills to which they are already entitled.
torates, and we will dramatically simplify the many funding streamsWe will therefore introduce measures to make it easier for pensioners available to local areas through new Local Area Agreements. We willand people on low incomes to claim Council Tax Benefit.
also give councils greater stability by providing three-year funding. We will continue to deliver efficiency savings and improvements to localIn the longer term, we are committed to reforming council tax and will services through joint procurement, shared services, streamliningconsider carefully the conclusions of the Lyons Review into local govadministrative structures while promoting decision-making at theernment finance.
level that will make a difference. We will continue to strengthen the lO6lO7The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5
§ The nations and regions of the UK
In our first term, we devolved power to Scotland and Wales and restored city-wide government to London. Britain is stronger as a result. In the next Parliament, we will decentralise power further. In
Wales we will develop democratic devolution by creating a stronger
Assembly with enhanced legislative powers and a reformed structure and electoral system to make the exercise of Assembly responsibilities clearer and more accountable to the public. We will also review the powers of the London Mayor and the Greater London Authority. And we will devolve further responsibility to existing regional bodies in relation to planning, housing, economic development and transport.
« Northern irelandThe best way to tackle
The Belfast Agreement on Good Friday l998, was a remarkable achievement. Life in Northern Ireland is immeasurably better as aex C lu y) on l. S tO LlV e result. A huge programme of reform in policing, justice and rights, together with the lowest ever unemployment has helped address the° inequalities of the past and has created a new confidence. C hoic e and powe Yr tO
It is unacceptable that seven years after the agreement there are still°5) paramilitary groups involved in criminality and punishment attacks. thos é left b ehind.
This has to end. The period of transition is over. Unionist politicians have made it clear that they are prepared to share power with nationalists and republicans if violence is ended once and for all. It is ttme for all groups in Northern Ireland to make it clear they will only use democratic and peaceful means to advance their aims.
We will work tirelessly with the parties in Northern Ireland and with the Irish government to reestablish the devolved institutions. But this can only happen on an inclusive basis if the IRA ends paramilitarism and criminality for good and decommissions its weapons. Bringing this about so that normal politics can take over in the Province will be our principal aim.
lO8The Labour Party manifesto 2OO5Democracy: Power devolved, citizens empowered
Loyalist paramilitary violence and criminality is equally intolerable. WeHaving been the first government to take action to clean up the fundwill ensure that it is dealt with severely while providing the assistanceing of political parties, we will continue to work with the independent necessary to Loyalist communities to ensure that prosperity is spreadElectoral Commission to explore how best to support the vital demothroughout Northern Ireland. cratic role of political parties while recognising that campaigning activity must always be funded by parties from their own resources.
§ Parliamentary reform
Labour has already taken steps to make the House of Commons moreSince l997 there has been a flowering of innovative forms of public representative, through all-women shortlists. Labour will also continueengagement, for example, the Citizens Council used by the National to support reforms that improve parliamentary accountability andInstitute for Clinical Excellence to advise on ethical dilemmas. With scrutiny led by the successful Modernisation Committee. the growing importance of new public policy issues and dilemmas - particularly those arising from scientific advances - we will continue to
In our first term, we ended the absurdity of a House of Lords domi-explore new and innovative forms of public engagement raising their nated by hereditary peers. Labour believes that a reformed Upperprofile and status in policy-making.
Chamber must be effective, legitimate and more representative without challenging the primacy of the House of Commons.8 A voice for all
A fully democratic society depends on giving everyone a voice and
Following a review conducted by a committee of both Houses, we willstake. Only Labour governments have ever introduced race relations seek agreement on codifying the key conventions of the Lords, andlegislation, and laws passed in 2OOO are ensuring that all public bodies developing alternative forms of scrutiny that complement rather thanpromote diversity and tackle discrimination against black and Asian replicate those of the Commons; the review should also explore howBritons. We will continue to promote civil rights for disabled people, the upper chamber might offer a better route for public engagement inensuring full implementation of the new positive duty on the public scrutiny and policy-making. We will legislate to place reasonable limitssector to promote equality of opportunity for disabled people. We will on the time bills spend in the second chamber - no longer than 6O sit-also introduce a similar duty to promote equality of opportunity ting days for most bills. between women and men, and will further extend protection against discrimination on the grounds of religion and belief. We are commitAs part of the process of modernisation, we will remove the remainingted to improving the rights and opportunities of gays and lesbians, hereditary peers and allow a free vote on the composition of thethat’s why we brought in legislation on civil partnerships, reducing the
House. age of consent, repealed Section 28 and reformed the sexual offences legislation so that it was no longer discriminatory.
Labour remains committed to reviewing the experience of the new electoral systems - introduced for the devolved administrations, theIt remains our firm and clear intention to give people of all faiths the
European Parliament and the London Assembly. A referendumsame protection against incitement to hatred on the basis of their reliremains the right way to agree any change for Westminster. gion. We will legislate to outlaw it and will continue the dialogue we llOlllThe Labour Party manifesto 2OO5 have started with faith groups from all backgrounds about how best to balance protection, tolerance and free speech.
We are proud to have brought in the Human Rights Act, enabling
British citizens to take action in British courts rather than having to wait years to seek redress in Strasbourg. But rights must be balanced by responsibilities. So we will continue to bear down on abusive or frivolous claims.
In the next Parliament we will establish a Commission on Equality and
Human Rights to promote equality for all and, tackle discrimination, and introduce a Single Equality Act to modernise and simplify equality legislation.
The Tories have only one policy on democratic reform - opportunism. Arch centralisers when in office, they now claim to be localists. Having refused for decades to accept any reform of the archaic House of Lords, some of them now claim to support a fully elected House. The choice is forward with new Labour to modern institutions and more power than ever devolved to communities and successful local authorities. Or back with the Tories to a government indifferent to the health of our democracy and negligent of our institutions.