eee;
*in a deafbs ol 5:. i»
- I"l 743 IE ifalSI?? i.
_#-_) ”, a 4
II“t
Sage“dl#: - a. Y, Ne sijrl:
‘ea“i wvl liri
II\?
a Il
-. An Ij: awie tt. lij
5Ii
LIi7
More and more people are supporting the]
Liberal Democrats.
Every sign is that we can win more votes and elect more Liberal Democrat MPs. PE
Britain has real problems. Liberal DemocratsI are putting forward real solutions.:
Liberal Democrats offer a real alternative.
thereaialternative. orgSS is Oe ceI believe that the 2OOlit is underpinned by costed Tax and replace it witha fair and urgency. We are by far
- 2OO5 parliament will beand credible pledges. Wesystem based on people’sthe greenest of the three remembered as the periodare determined that whatability to pay. main UK political parties during which the Liberalwe promise can be achieved. aand this manifesto again
Democrats came of age, Our figures, based on official Society is still scarred byconfirms that fact.
ushering in a new era ofcostings, alladd up. Andat -_ inequality. Tackling that truly three-party politics. the heart of our programme isa priority for the Liberal It is a privilege at this
That is why we enter thisisa determination toDemocrats. For example, it’s election to be leading the
General Election campaignachieve a fairer and moretime that we redressed the..:_.. oe eemost socially progressive with such optimism, unitystraightforward tax systemscandalous discriminationarty in British politics. Our of purpose and publicwhich delivers the socialagainst women in theparty ‘ties h. h; goodwill. priorities we believe thatstate pension system. Weprior res ner ea; ome people want. propose a ‘citizen’s pension’, @!€ lear, our instinctive
We have been testedbased on residency instead -‘! nternationalism - through
- inside and outsideThe mark of a decentof national insurancepositive and proactive
Parliament - as neversociety is one which creates contributions, which would engagement with Europe, before. We have stuck toopportunity for young- at last - provide womenthe United Nations and our principles: from ourpeople and provides security who have spent time caring the Commonwealth - is opposition to the war inand dignity for those infor children and elderlydefinitive.
Iraq to our defence oftheir older years. At bothparents a pension in their fundamental civil libertiesends of the age spectrum, own right. lam ambitious for the over control orders. Againwe believe that Britain7Liberal Democrats and and cite we have beenmust do better. That’s why - In addition, we remain -the Liberal Democrats are e rea Seawe pa our commuiment topee o" a ental wich isthe real alternative at this nwrsin-.
@ YaS Increasinglyavdolls. MARS) Stuaent top uleSHTTNG e [NESKGIS EN EIGERelection. Please read, reflect discredited Government -and tuition fees alongsideit is a multi-racial, multi_ and if you like what we over Council Tax, topup and our determination toethnic society. We will: stand for, your support can tuition fees, and ID cards. guarantee free long-termnot pander to fear andmake the diff,..4Irence.
personal care for the elderly. prejudice. We offer fair andake meerence
The challenge - and theAnd we can point with pride effective policies over the opportunity - is now toto the example of Scotland, distinct issues of asylum andLu p\/ provide the real alternative - where Liberal Democratimmigration.
at this election. That is what ministers in government this manifesto is all abouthave already delivered both Through all our thinking,
- detailing our analysisand these policies. In addition, there is a green thread ofCharles Kennedy - Leader policy ambitions; and allof -§ wewould scrap the Council environmental awarenessof the Liberal Democrats;;; Freedom. Fairness. Trust. These are the qualities of the British people at their best, and they
Liberal Democrats are open and straightforwardin taxes and government charges than those who areare the guiding principles of the Liberal Democrats.
about how we will pay for our policies. At the lastmuch better off. That cannot be right. Today, underThis manifesto is built on these principles - principles that we believe must underpin the three general elections we set out full details of how -_ Labour, the poorest 2O per cent of the population paygovernment of this country, but which are too often lacking in public life today.
much our policies would cost and how we would pay -_38 per cent of their income in tax, compared with just for them. None of the other parties did this.35 per cent for the richest 2O per cent. That is unfair. Because Liberal Democrats believe that individuals should govern their own lives, free from:: unnecessary interference by government or society. So we want to build a society which
Labour has increased spending, an increase only the - Three of our key policies will create a fairergives individual men and women opportunities to pursue their aims, develop their talents
Liberal Democrats were honest enough to propose at distribution of the costs of public services: and shape their successes. A country where people are free to shape their future is stronger, the last election. Given this growth in spending, mostwealthier, happier, and more fulfilled.
of our proposals at this election canbe funded from Scrapping tuition and topup fees for students.
savings in current budgets. This means switchingCost: £l.2 billion per vearBecause ill-health, disability, poverty, environmental pollution and the fear of crime curtail around £5 billion each Peer from low-priority_-per year. freedom, just as much as discriminatory laws or arrest without trial. So we want government government programmes in order to fund our key; to provide the essential requirements that everyone needs to make real choices in their
Introducing free personal care for elderly and proposals. disabled peoplelives - a good education, a decent pension, a clean environment, effective policing and
I., high quality healthcare. And we want to see fairness too in the way in which taxes are
Our savings include: Cost: £l.7 billion per year. raised and minorities are treated.
Catan tees Eyelet Ing nts Bese steKeeping down local taxes (as well as basing them onBdeliver freedd faid to give citihhold of Trade and Industry and ending unnecessaryep ggecause to deliver freedom and fairness, we need to give citizens the power to ho...; ability to pay). government to account. So we want to see government brought closer to the people y tO pay, subsidies we will save approximately one third of theoT,;
Department's exoenditure. This will be reinvestedit is meant to serve - which is why we are committed to curtail the personal power and: ld. P..-.: Cost: £2. O billion per year. patronage of the Prime Minister, strengthen British democracy and hand many powers instead in our priorities set out in this manifesto.:_back from central government to local neighbourhoods with real democratic control over
Wstaside for the Chancellor’These three items will cost £4.9 billion and we willthose who wield power.
sing the money set aside for the Chancellor'sli
Child Trust Fund tocut class sizes in primary schools. pay for them with one tax change. We will introduceThroughout this manifesto we explain how we will put these beliefs into practice creating
The Child Trust Fund will cost almost £l. s billion overanew 5O per cent rate on the portion of individuala society where people are more free, where government exercises its powers more fairly, a parliament to give cash handouts when today’sincome exceeding £lOO, OOO a year. Just one per centand where the bond of trust is reestablished between the people and their government.
babies reach l8. It’s better for these children tooes will ite aL (because me can afford to)Throughout thismanifesto, we recognise ourresponsibility to future generations, to protect qOOe precious environmen at sustains all lite on tne planet. Folicies Tor environmenta benefit from the money now, in their early years, by waist most peopie WI se SSaSRONER OCTETtht that sust IIlife on the planet. Policies fItal cutting class sizesstudent tuition fees, abolish care charges for thesustainability are therefore set out in every area - because for us, environmental policy is: elderly, and abolish the Council Tax.”not an optional extra but an integral part of the way in which we will govern.
@ Not introducing ID cards. Hundreds of millions canThroughout this manifesto, we show how we can help be saved by not introducing ID cards. That moneyachieve these aims through Britain playing a leading would be better spent on increasing the number ofaft.: role in Europe and on the wider international stage, police on the streets by lO, OOO and providing them. building effective global institutions and acting in with the technology to make them more effective. accordance with international laws - because in an ever
Matthew Taylormore globalised and interdependent world, isolation is
We will also make taxes fairer - cutting costs for most Chair of the Liberal Democrat Parliamentary Partyin none of our interests.
people. At present, people on low incomes or in oldThroughout this manifesto you will find this Liberal age have to pay a higher proportion of their incomeAll figures are for financial year 2OO6/7. Democrat approach. Freedom. Fairness. Trust. HEALTH: Putting Patients FirstOO4 - O5
EDUCATION & SKILLS: Ambitious for/Every ChildO6 - O7
JUSTICE & CRIME: Tackling Crime, Defending LibertyO8 - O9
ECONOMY & BUSINESS: Building Prosperity for BritainlO - ll
PENSIONS & BENEFITS: Fair Pensions and Benefitsl2
LOCAL COMMUNITIES: Strong Local Communitiesl3
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS: Britain? s Place in Europe and the World l4 - l5
RURAL AFFAIRS: A Fairer Deal for/Rural Communitiesl6
TRANSPORT: Getting eainMovingl7
BETTER GOVERNMENT: Stop the Abuselof Power, l8
ENVIRONMENT:}Our Pledge ( Actionl9
By,: Ca
F; Po
Ir Fo _ ee a f
*Ks, a
Liberal Democrats have~circumstances, and often theqf: f j ' championed the devolution ofinfluence of Liberal Democratsa8 EEThis manifesto is available from our powers to Scotland and Wales, in government. Our Scottish, website on ang many decisions made inand Welsh Parties wu poeaeCopies in alternative formats are available
England only. That means that this document but reflectingfrom Liberal Democrats, 4 Cowley Street, policies in those nations arethose differences. This manifestoLondon SWlP 3NB, tel: O2O 7222 7999, or increasingly different fromsets out our plans for a Liberalqemail: policy@libdems. org. uk those in England - reflectingDemocrat government in different choices, priorities andWestminster. Photo: Alex Folkes ii atherealalternative.
-oo a
#-ir my_ --
#‘P: i4 PF ul77
It is not asking much, surely? A National Health Service thatant cagnosis helps you stay healthy, and makes sure that when you do fallsimple onl ly ill you are treated quickly, irrespective of wealth or status.~ andthe Liberal;; oy;; Democrats
Yet despite the investment now going in - which Liberalshare it. More
Democrats so famously pressed the Government to deliverdoctors, nurses
- far too much is still wrong in the NHS. and health professionals on the front
“Older people needing basic care, such as feeding, fairly to all who need it, with doctors free to focus.
dressing and washing, are too often forced to payon the patient, not the red tape.”I INE, free tota ke
-sometimes even to sell their homes - despiteI the Government's own Royal Commission reportBaarsp rofession al saying this is wrong. decisions on the
“Instead of doctors and nurses being freed up toPaul Burstowbasis of patient give their best to patients, Labour ministers try toLiberal Democrat Shadow Secretary of State fori pull the strings with pointless targets and endless Healthneed, speedier bureaucracy. Instead of clean wards and the mostd lag nosIs, modern equipment, MRSA and other superbugsare spreading, and scanners lie idle for lack ofand effective trained staff. treatment.
“Labour and Conservative politicians talk aboutaLa bou i's red
‘choice’ - but health care isn’t like choosing aPats supermarket or a pair of shoes. I believe thatta pe, and choice has a place in the NHS, but! don’t subscribe.
to the false idea that choice will solve all itsCo nservative problems. When you have a heart attack or aiid serious accident, and are rushed to hospital, norp rivate su bsid les, one wants to know that they could have had the4make no sense.” choice of a hospital fifty miles away with better. ia funding and better equipment. What people‘ want is their own local hospital well-funded, wellstaffed and well-equipped to give them the bestha possible chance to survive and recover.
“The NHS was conceived by Beveridge, a
Liberal, and brought into being by a LabourJulia Neuberger administration very different from today’sLiberal Democrat Health
Government. Too often hitting the governmentiSpokesperson in the Lords target means missing the point. It is time toand former Chief Executive remember the founding principles of the NHS: of the leading health policy care, of the highest possible quality, availableinstitute, the King’s Fund. O4O5
Labour Government has refusedto government meddling. ClinicalNHS every year without accessthrough clearer food and alcohol
Those towards the end of theirmake public. decisions should be taken byto specialised care and painlabelling. To improve children’s lives deserve the best possible care. health professionals and localmanagement. We will prioritisehealth, on top of plans to increase
Liberal Democrats will provide freeinvestment willbe determined by extending choice and access tofunding for school meals, we will personal care for elderly peoplelocally elected and accountablethese services, including moreintroduce minimum nutrition and people with disabilities, forpeople who can be removed bysupport for hospices. People withstandards for school meals, as we as long as they need it, fundedlocal people if they get it wrong. long-term conditions should bealready have in Scotland; we will out of our new so per cent rateTo reduce the risk of illness goingScrapping unnecessary centralised entitled to an agreed Personalrestrict advertising of unhealthy on that part of people’s incomesundetected we willend the charges targets will mean that your localCare Plan, setting out theircourse food during children’s television over £lOO, OOO. In short, we willfor eye and dental check-ups which _ hospital will have the time andof treatment, where and whenprogrammes; and we will require implement the recommendations deter people from coming forward _ flexibility to put patients first, they will be treated, and whatfood and drink sold in vending of the independent Royalfor testing. It is also unfair thatproviding personalised care andother help, such as social care, they machines on school premises
Commission on Long-Term Care. some people living with long-term cleaner hospitals andtreatingthe will receive. We will introduceto meet minimum health and
Liberal Democratsin government - conditions pay no prescriptionsickest the quickest. new legislation to safeguard thenutrition standards. Because in Scotland have already achieved -_ charges, while people with other, rights and welfare of peoplewith second-hand smoke kills, we will this for elderly people. equally serious, conditions (such asmental health problems, allowing ban smoking in all enclosed public cystic fibrosis and multiple sclerosis)them to exercise more controlplaces. Our policies as a whole have to pay. We will extend theMany people can’t find an NHSover their treatment. Wewillend will help tackle other causes of illrange of long-term conditionsdentist to take them on. We willinappropriate age discriminationhealth, such as poverty, pollution which qualify for exemption from reform NHS dental contracts so that within the NHS; forexample, many and poor housing.
prescription charges, basedonan more dentists are encouraged toolder women are not currently
Your chances of surviving life-independent review. do more NHS work. This will rebuild invited for the routine breast threatening and debilitatingthe relationship between thecancer screening which could save illnesses improve the swifter thedental profession and government __ their lives.
diagnosis. When a GP considerswhich has been badly damaged you may have a serious illness weunder Conservatives and Labour.
will make sure you are offeredPersonal Dental Plans will set out diagnosis by the quickest practical I We will complete NHS plans tohow frequently people should route, public or private, so thatrecruit at least an extra 8, OOOhave a checkup, how better toWe will concentrate on helping the NHS can treat you moremore doctors, l2, OOO morenurses_ _ look after their teeth and, for those people stay healthy, as well as quickly. More tests and scansand l8, OOO more therapists andwith serious dental problems, their caring for them when they fall will be available in places likescientists by 2OO8. That will cutfuture course of treatment. ill. According to the NHS report,
GPs’ surgeries and communitywaiting times and improve theSecuring our Future Health, the pharmacies. We will tackle thequality of care. Doctors, nurses andGovernment's failure to tackle the scandal of expensive scannerstherapists are highly trained andunnecessary causes of ill-health being under-used by investing indedicated health professionals, will cost the NHS an extra £3O training, recruitment and retention while ministers and civil servantsWe will encourage regular health __ billion a year by 2O22. If the causes of the key staff needed to operate arenot. Liberal Democrats willhack ‘MoTs' tailored to individualof ill-health aren't tackled, the them. We will provide morescans awaytheredtapeandabolishthe patients’ needs, with wider access NHS of the future won't be able to at weekends and in the evenings. absurd targets set by government, to screening and blood pressurecope -so we will give people the
We will publish waiting times forand free frustrated healthand cholesterol tests. Tens ofinformation and opportunities to tests and scans-figureswhichthe professionals from demoralising thousands of patients die in themake healthy choices, for example
II Vsa2
IyhA“ai:
acer jae ILeFL:
44teI. i"ilsI
Py~ ~f
LAS Ytoawk‘ql
2 i:4rieoe ij4a:-bar
7Eat i SiS: a f4 mi>LLa
5it
Iyy!.
Bsi iI'a7 iePeiI amesatherealalternative.
The finest i t ttike is to giG e Tinest investment our generation Can MaKe IS tO Give a high-quality education to the next generation. Nothing sets a child free more than this. If we are successful, each and every child is given the opportunity to unlock their potential. If we“In Scotland, fail then we put their whole future at risk. thanks to Liberal
Democrats in
“Before I became an MP! worked for thirty fourI most certainly was for my own. I am proud ofgovernment, years as a teacher - the last fifteen asheadteacher what many children already achieve, but more canwe have a I rea dy of one of Britain's largest secondary schools. Ibe done. Quite simply, we must be ambitious for:.
taught some of the most disadvantaged childrenevery child. ”Iabolished tuition in the country, and I saw at first hand the power“. itof a high-quality education. Indeed, my passion toylalees, J ust as we enter Parliament came because I could no longer/:
stand aside whilst politicians continued to fail our-hpromised. When enildren, LAEyou vote Liberal
“As ahead teacher I was utterly dismayed by theDemocrat, way in which Conservative and Labour politiciansPhil Willis used education as a political football. Each newLiberal Democrat Shadow Secretary of State forpeop I e@ can education minister had to make their mark byEducation.
changing the curriculum, increasing red tape, now see It interfering in the classroom and pretending education could be micro-managed from London. real ly makes
Yet not one of them seemed genuinely preparedith e d ifference to fight for the investment needed to reduce classF,, sizes, provide modern equipment, support goodThis time, I discipline and provide a well-trained teacher; workforce.4! hope you lI help
“The policies I have helped develop are aboutus del Iver the addressing these issues. They are about striving for excellence and being ambitious for every child-same for aII ot and every student. I want our young people toaBritain " maximise their potential by being free to chooseif, the most appropriate university course without fear of a mountain of debt. I want them to be. Usthus able to choose high-quality apprenticeships and skill training - not as a second-best option but-_ranked alongside traditional academic pathways.
And I want to see adults, too, being given the opportunity to acquire new skills to meet theJim Wallace QC MSP demands of ever-changing technologies andifDeputy First Minister of
Geloel aise Ahothe Scottish Executive and
“Parents are rightly ambitious for their childrentied tearing luteO6O7 junior class sizes to an averageable to teach without disruption. learning, as Liberal Democrats in of 25. We will extend before andOur smaller class sizes will helpChildren with special educationalgovernment in Scotland are already after school provision from 8reduce discipline problems. To deal needs should be schooled in andoing.
Labour broke their promise ona. m. to 6 p. m. for all children andwith more persistent disruptionenvironment appropriate to their tuition fees. The result: tens ofcomplete 35OO Children’s Centres -_ schools will agree externally-needs - usually in local schools with thousands of able students areby 2OlO. Building on our Maternity monitored ‘positive behaviourappropriate support, or in specialist saddled with mortgage-sizedIncome Guarantee, which willplans’ with parents and pupils. schools for those who need them.
debts or deterred altogetherraise maternity pay for the first six If necessary, local educationParents’ wishes must be considered Weare committed to closing the from going to university. Fundedmonths to £l7O a week instead ofauthorities’ Behavioural Supportwhen making decisions aboutfunding gap between schools and from part of our new 5O per cent£lO2.8O at present, these policiesUnits will tackle exceptionaltype of schooling. A designatedcolleges, starting by providing rate on incomes over £lOO, OOO, will give every child the bestproblems in particular schools. teacher in each school will haveequal funding for equivalent
Liberal Democrats will abolishpossible start. When all else fails we willresponsibility to identify and plan courses, wherever they are taught.
all tuition fees and make grantsguarantee that head teachers will - for children with special needs, and To deliver world-class skills, worldavailable to help poorer studentshave local education authorityact as a contact point for parentsclass facilities are needed. We with maintenance costs. Thatsupport for ‘managedtransfer’'to I andother teachers. We will make -_ willimplement plans to invest in will build on the achievements ofother schools or special units forsure that all teachers and teaching the modern, high-quality college
Liberal Democrats in governmentpupils whose behaviour remainsassistants working with childrenfacilities needed to deliver highin Scotland. No one will be deniedunacceptable. with special educational needsquality skills training.
the opportunity of a universityare appropriately trained. Special education because of the fear ofschools will act as resource centres debt, while universities will receive I The teacher recruitment crisisto support local schools with their the increased funds they need. means that thousands of children Childrenin England are nowspecialist provision. Inturn special I Wewill maintain the right of are being taught key subjects bythe most tested in Europe, yetschools will be linked to researchchildren to free school transport staff who are not trained specialists there is little evidence that thedepartments in universities so that I when they live more than two miles in that subject. Liberal Democrats I Government's obsession withthey can benefit directly from, from their designated primary will guarantee that all childrentesting and targets has improvedand be involved with, the latestschool and three miles from their
Expert opinion confirms whatwill be taught the core subjectsof standards. Liberal Democratsresearch in special education. secondary school - a right which is common sense tells us: childrenEnglish, Maths, Science, Modernbelieve that teachers should bebeing taken away by the Labour well taught and well-cared-forLanguages and ICT by suitablygiven more time to teach and thatGovernment. For those who live in their early years have a betterqualified teachers through funding _ testing should have a clear purpose: nearer school, there still need to opportunity to lead successfuland secondary schools to provide theto improve learning for individual § School-leaversshould be equipped _ be safe alternatives to the car; rewarding lives. The Government -_ necessary high-quality teacher-children. We will reduce the levelwith the skills they need to succeed we will promote ‘Safe Routes to has the wrong priorities, handing _ training courses in these subjects. of external testing, replacingin the workplace. We willcombine School’, with calmed traffic, safe out a one-off cash windfall to l8compulsory tests at seven andGCSE, Alevel and vocationalpavements, good lighting and year-olds at taxpayers’ expenseeleven with a system of samplingprogrammes of study withinanew adults on hand to conduct ‘walking through the Child Trust Fund. against national standards. diploma system, stretching thebuses’.
Liberal Democrats will use thisChildren need to learn inasafe and Teachers will regularly assess pupils’ most gifted and engaging those money better by recruiting 2l, OOO -_ orderly environment, where highperformance, using the results topreviously turned off by schooling.
more teachers to cut infant classstandards of behaviour are upheld, informteaching and give parents Wewill give all students over sizes from the present maximumwhere bullying is challengedaccurate information on theirthe age of l4 the opportunity to of 3O to an average of 2O andeffectively and where teachers are -child’s progress. combine vocational and academic
Photo: PA/EMPICS el]TM, m4Lif I
2.77Sina; fae iJ
Dsiz2 8 oppcoe" O: fis a.7oF - e I Lit i
6iie“ es A en i Ne Bie md{?: fae iLa;./FsJ z2 if
I5*I
I5r‘"he aie tfyf“; i ra --Ti i5el i,-_‘thereolalternative.
Crime - and the fear of crime -- wrecks people’s lives. ry.
inll.//“u
Governments keep talking tough, but everyone knows it isn’tIhave been working. It’s time to concentrate on the basics: more policeee tofind.. at Labour on the beat, more effort to stop prisoners reoffending, moreee eee help for victims of crime.
elpunderstand that in fighting crime and terrorism,
“This Government just keeps trying to take awaythe po int is to citizens’ basic freedoms - such as the right to“sO jury trial, or to demonstrate peacefully outsidedefend B rital n's
Parliament. They even wanted the power to lock;; anyone up at the whim of the Home Secretary. J ustice an d
They plan to charge every citizen nearly £lOO each to hold a compulsory identity card, despite the factdemocracy, not that other countries have found that they don’tg ive It away.
work. It’s all done in the name of cutting crime.
and tackling terrorism; but it is the terrorists whoToug h Liberal want to take away freedom and democracy - our- os government should defend our liberties. po I ICIES put
“The truth is that ID cards did not stop the Spanishmore Po I Ice on train bombs, and even the 9/ll bombers had their papers in order. The US has ruled out IDthe beat and cards because they don’t work. What stops bothtack e the Causes terrorists and criminals is good intelligence and.
effective investigation - and that takes a lot moreof crime. We police. What protects Britain's borders is not costly
ID cards for law-abiding British citizens, but a_won't su rrender strong UK Border Force detecting illegal entry andB rita i n's criminal activity. ''u
“Both the Conservatives and Labour like to talkro. liberties.
tough, but have failed to deliver. I want my -“hiette children to grow up ina safe community, while.?
keeping intact the basic freedoms for which theooo
British people have fought so hard across the centuries.”is
ENavnit Dholakia
Vy lleALib Dem Deputy Leader in
_Athe Lords and Spokesperson
Mark Oatenon Home Affairs
Liberal Democrat Shadow Home SecretaryEO8O9
Through Community Justice Panels, day, with increased resourcesand we will repeal it. Effective local people willhavemoresayin for education and training a top action against terrorism is vital, the punishment offenders carry out priority so that they learn the skills and our priority will be to extend We will introduce a Single
By getting rid of Labour'sinthe community -forexample, -_ to acquire a legitimate job. Thethe criminal law to enable terrorist © Equality Act to outlaw all unfair expensive, illiberal and ineffective by making them clean off graffitior effort a prisoner puts into theirsuspects to be prosecuted in thediscrimination, (including on the
ID card scheme, we will pay forrepair damage to victims’ property. education and work-related skillsmainstream courts. We willadmit grounds of race, gender, religion lO, OOO police on top of Labour'swill be one of the factors usedevidence from communicationsor belief, sexual orientation, plans. We will also completewhen considering their releaseinterception. If control ordersare disability, age or gender identity), existing plans for an extra 2O, OOOdate, as part of our emphasis onstill required they must be granted thus giving equal protection for community support officers totackling the causes of crime. by ajudge, be time-limited andbe all. We will establish hate-crimes back them up. The average police Many towns and cities aresubject to a high standard of proof. investigation units in each police officer today spends moretimein becoming nogo areas at theforce to coordinate information the police station thantheydoon weekend. We will tackle excessiveand action against racism, the streets. We will give the police - drinking by cracking down onhomophobia and other hate the technology they need, andlicensees who serve people whenFor centuries Britain has hadcrimes. Liberal Democrats led the simplify the bureaucracy they face, clearly drunk or under-age. WeWewill increase police resources @ Proud record of grantingcall for an amendment to the laws toallow them to spend moretime -_will make big late-night venuesto improve the detection andsafe refuge to those fleeingon incitement to racial hatred, to on patrol andlesstimetiedtothe contribute to the cost of extrainvestigation of crime. We willpersecution. In turn, refugees have criminalise those who use religious desk. We will concentrate morelate-night policing. Unacceptable create a coordinated UK Border enriched the UK’s culture andwords as a pretext for race hate.
police efforts on tackling drugnoise and offensive behaviour willForce to strengthen the country’swealth immeasurably. The Home - Qur Equality Act will stop sametraffickers and those drug usersbe tackled through Acceptable.._ Office has a record of delays andles in civil partnershi who resort to crime to feed theirBehaviour Contracts agreedborders against terrorism, peoplebad decisions on asylillSex Coupres IN civ’ partnerships aneaeenetrafficking and drug smuggling. asylum, SO WE WI" being treated unfairly compared habits, rather than criminalisingbetween the individual, theirtransfer responsibility for assessing.. F.
We oppose moves to reduce;; with married couples in pension people possessing cannabis only for family, the police and the localigh. ialasylum claims to a dedicatedarrangements their own personal use. authority. Where individuals do not or remove rig ts to jury trial, agency to sort out the mess,9 cooperate we will use Anti-Socialand the routine use of hearsayensuring that those who need help
Behaviour Orders, plus appropriate ¢Vidence or revelation of Previous get it, whilst those who don't can’t measures to tackle underlyingconvictions. We opposed Labour's abuse the system. We will work causes. plans to allow the Home Secretary within the EU to develop common
Liberal Democrats will make moreto order house arrest and otherstandards so that all EU countries non-violent criminals - such as finerestrictions on personalliberty. A take their fair share of refugees.
defaulters, shoplifters and pettyBritish citizen’s liberty must onlyWe will also end asylum-seekers’ vandals - do tough communitybe removed through a fair judicialdependence on benefits, allowing work as an alternative to jail. With four out of five prisonersprocess, not on the commandthem to work so they can pay their
Experience shows that this reduces _ functionally illiterate, and over half -_ of politicians. Liberal Democratsown way and use their skills to reoffending, gives them skills for of prisoners reoffending, it’stime achievedsubstantialamendment _ benefit everyone.
legitimate work, and means thatto make prison work. Prisonersof the Prevention of Terrorism they pay back to the community. will be subject to atough working -_ Act, but it still has serious flaws, oF odeS5 aia of;+
-*.-‘4eTEe oat at“lrh eeCee
*tsf aloe set” ft eaaa
-a oe t
], f‘Jfee) _ -- F "i-"iH “he aL i, lad aesh 7 Pa oa SoEe dine '-ra3 - ty hk7-- IWal, a ii caneFr7 ma ee fa ene il SS
-_--FL
ZtP!}
Fir
EJa.
rarns4 miatesle ee J a4-- es “aeI
“-t_"-- 6 al mle -7:
5e- ee holTathereolalternative.
priority to helping small businesses.
Unlike the other parties, we have consistently set out costings for our manifesto pledges, explainingUnder Labour, ordinary hardhow much money they will needworking families pay more as a share and how they will all be paid for. of their incomes in tax than the very
So this manifesto includes a specific rich. Under Labour, elderly people section outlining our main costings. _ have to sell their homes to pay
Our package of tough choices onfor their care, while rising Council spending, and fairer taxes, meansTax and university topup fees that most people will be betterare making the system even more off. There is only one proposedunfair. Taking all taxes together, net tax rise (to 5O per cent on the proportion of incomes over l. l. l.£lOO, OOO a year, affecting just one
There is no job more important for anyper cent of taxpayers) which will pay. for the abolition of student tuition government than managing the economy well. fees, free personal cre forthe elderly, and lower local taxes. Most people’s tax will be cut by replacinga. me
Council Tax with a system based on ability to pay, saving the typicali household around £45O per year.--F
Liberal Democrats have different spending priorities from Labour. We believe that in order to concentrateau" I n Vi nce Ca ble,
“When Labour was first elected, they seemed to“Third, I will introduce fairer taxes. Our only netresources on currently underc understand this. Liberal Democrats were the first totax rise in this manifesto is on that slice of people’sfunded areas such as pensions,; a former lead I Ng propose making the Bank of England independent, earnings over £lOO, OOO a year, in order to abolishpolicing and early years education, ist j to stop politicians playing with interest rates to suitstudent tuition fees and care charges on the elderly, funding should be switched fromeconomist in their own reelection rather than the economy. and cut local taxes. But we will make taxes fairer -lower priority areas. That meansindustry, the
Gordon Brown adopted this suggestion, evensuch as replacing the Council Tax with a system basedreducing unnecessary subsidies toy, though there had been nothing in Labour'son ability to pay. The typical household’s tax bill willindustry, and cutting wasteful newLiberal Democrats manifesto about it. be cut by around £45O each year as a result. initiatives like the ID card and the
Child Trust Fund handouts for future aye as Shadow
“Asa result, and by balancing the books - with the“Finally, simpler taxes. Gordon Brown has endlesslyl8 year-olds. This will allow us to advantage of relatively good world economicmade the tax system more complex and unworkable. spend more on the things that reallyCha ncel lor conditions - the economy prospered. That, in the end, is self-defeating, simply addingmatter, like better pensions, moreh to business costs, chaos at the Inland Revenue, andpolice and smaller class sizes. someone WNo
“Increasingly, Labour has started to make mistakes. misery for confused taxpayers. can be relied on
Too many rules and tax complications, holding businesses back. Inadequate action to contain the“These simple rules are my basic principles - andtoma ke sure explosion of personal debt. Economic forecastsfoundation-stones for Britain's future prosperity.”;.
making unrealistic assumptions about future growth.\eeWe welcome the greater economicthat every LI beral
Failure to take the tough decisions to prioritiseae eestability that has been established.
taxpayers’ money, to spend it where it matters most. since interest rates were setDemocrat pol Icy
Over-complicated tax credits and means-testedVincent Cableindependently by the Bank: ffd bld benefits. Liberal Democrat Shadow Chancellor of the° England (which the pera. IS aTToraabie, an
Exchequeremocrats were the first party to' “As the former Chief Economist at Shell, I haveadvocate). Now, there needs to bethat Seen Ic wrestled with these problems all my life, including_more independent scrutiny andpolicy delivers advising governments. I know these decisions are notdiscipline in fiscal policy. We will:
easy - and can easily be thrown by world events. jgive the National Audit Office themore stabil Ity power to scrutinise the budget
“So want to make clear my priorities for managingfaures ning public borrowing, and less red ta pe.
the economy: so that no Chancellor can fiddle"".
”the figures. We will make sure thatThis manifesto IS
“First, and most important, I will ensure a stable and-_the Office for National Statisticsrealistic. costed well-managed economy. I'll stick to the Goldenis independent and accountable'’
Rules - that government borrowing should onlyto Parliament, not subservientand deliverable finance investment over the economic cycle, andieto ministers. We will tackle;..
that government debt should be no higher than 4oirresponsible credit expansion in- that’s why It wins per cent of GDP. To make sure of that, I'll give theimortgages and personal loans bynm
National Audit Office the job of publicly checking thecurbing misleading advertisingmy su pport.
budget figures. and anti-competitive practices by promoters of insurance forffff
“Second, I will insist on tough choices on publicmortgages and loans, and of creditLayX AGW Cr spending, cutting out low priorities in order to spendcards. We oppose the increasing more on what matters most. As a result, all ourcomplexity of business taxes andSusan Kramer policies are costed and affordable. we will consult with business onaFormer International Banker simpler and fairer system, giving.. F od the poorest 2O per cent of theB U Ss l N ESSbureaucratic and wasteful functions.
population pay 38 per cent of theirWe will transfer its useful roles to income in tax, compared to just 35Many small businesses pay amore appropriate departments, per cent for the richest 2O per cent. disproportionate amount in ratessuch as support for scientific net snot what people expectedLiberal Democrats will slash theas much as 35 per cent of theirresearch to our Department for roma Labour Government. Liberalred tape, bureaucracy and over-profits. We will help small businesses - Education, Skills and Science. The pemocrats will make the tax systemregulation that are holding Britishby reforming the business ratesChief Secretary to the Treasuryl_ airer and simpler. Asa irst stepbusinesses -especially smallsystem to allow firms with arateable _ will take on the role of advocateIt comes down to this:
towards reducing tax paid by lowbusinesses - back. We will start with value of less than £25, OOO to claim for business at the Cabinet table. td earners, we will axe the unfairthese three measures: a business rate allowance of upOverall, this will save £8 billion ofgovernment needs coun Tax ane replace it with a@ Nonew regulation will be passedto “5OO This would representtaxpayers money on the ne ofto concentrate on its ocal Income Tax based on people's.. saving of over £6OO a year for thea parliament. We will invest this...
ability to pay. This will cut the typical unt a Tl assessrvert of its costs and majority of small businesses. We will saving in our priorities, includingown job - delivering household's tax bill by over £45O. ey ‘. ff. also reform the valuation systemimproving education and traininga Stable, sustainable
T. aeNew regulations affecting...
O pay for our policies of abolishing busiilically bto base rates on site values, rather -which are of far more real benefitc student topup and tuition fees, scrapped unless Parliament °than rental value, which penalisesto business. economy, a skilled needing topay ortheircare and specifically approvestheirrenewal - theiroremises, workforce, and a cutting Council Tax, the richest oneafter a period specified in a ‘sunsetmodern infrastructure.
per cent of the population will payec * octetIt should only
5Opercenttax(upfrom 4ipercent). Endless visits by all sorts of::
on that part of their income overrnacsby one alk purvcee inspectionThere is no need for a bigWe will introduce a new legalintervene in the
£lOO, OOO per year.* department that interferes in theduty on businesses to trade fairly, market where it can economy and subsidises failingwhile cutting back unnecessary red.
companies at taxpayers’ expense. tape and bureaucracy. Enforcedshow that the benefits
The DTI is irrelevant to mostby the courts, this will require lessclearly outweigh the
People are increasingly strugglingenterprises, so in abolishing itform-filling than Labour's complexlati to afford their first home. We willLiberal Democrats will cut away itsrules, yet provide more effectivecosts. Regu ation raise tne starting point for stampprotection for consumers, andisalast resort. Red uty from £l2O, OOO to £l5O, OOO. promote free competition.
This step will take l5O, OOO mainly: tape must be cut.
first-time buyers out of payingBefore entering Parliament infield between small and largeIn my experience stamp duty altogether, and cut thel983l worked in business. Thered businesses-for example, cost of home ownership. tape, bureaucracy and wastefulby tackling the abuse ofWe will promote domestic tourismthis combination is rules were bad enough then. monopoly power throughopportunities, starting by creatingunique to the Liberal
They are much worse today. creating a duty to trade fairly. an English Tourism Board to match" And where there is a need forthose in Scotland, Wales andDemocrats.
“People running businesses upgovernment intervention, forNorthern Ireland, with increased
Liberal Democrats support a liberaland down the country are theexample in tackling pollution, resources for marketing England. Qux Sauwoueeconomic approach to trade, powerhouse of the economy. our promise is to harnessThese measures will help reduce investment and migration in theThey need the freedom tomarket forces with incentivesthe ‘tourism deficit’ - the difference national interest. We want Britaingenerate economic growthfor sustainable development, between the amount spent bylain Vallance to be at the centre of a liberalised,-yet they are held back, so that good businesses payoverseas visitors in the UK andFormer Chairman of BT and reformed European Union. Liberalstruggling under a mountainless tax. the amount spent by UK touristsformer President of the CBI
Democrats believe that Britainof government rules, taxabroad - which has quadrupled should work to create the rightcomplications, bureaucracy and"The business people I meetunder Labour and now stands at £l7 economic conditions to join theinspections. don’t want subsidies, theybillion.
euro (subject to a referendum) injust want government off order to safeguard investment in“So Ihave used my experiencetheir backs. They want the UK and reduce the cost and riskin business to make one thinggovernment to deliver skills of trade with the rest of Europe. Wesure above allelse-that Liberal and infrastructure, not ever will work to break down the tradeDemocrat business policy is allmore red tape. They want the barriers that prevent the poorestabout making things simpler, freedom to succeed. These are countries in the world selling theireasier and fairer for businesses. © our ambitions too.” goods to the richer countries on fair~ particularly small businesses terms.-to prosper and grow. St CE: fiw
“That means getting usgovernment off the back ofMalcolm Bruce
Econom migrants have helpedbusiness. For example, we willLiberal Democrat Trade and ee eee one ort errestcut back the cost of businessIndustry Spokesperson
[e). 'rates for small businesses.
economically and culturally. ThereWoudllweosunesedeuesc!
remains a positive economic benefitto prevent unnecessary from managed immigration to fillregulations imposing a burden the demand for skills and labouron business lona after their that are in short supply. We willusefulness has a Andconsult with business and the publicwewill get rid ie the to:
services to agree numbers of workhea Aflie le DTI Seenaf permits for economic migration tos Sit ee instead in make sure that Britain continues torn‘: Ing insteaa'!
prosper. high-quality training so that young people have the skills employers want.
“It also means a fairer playingthereolalternative.
pensioners will be better off andsix able to take account of individual" Many women who gave up workmillion poorer pensioners will paycircumstances, instead of the presentlam appa lled that to bring up their children receiveno local tax at all. Unlike the otherunfair rigid formula. in the fourth richest
Millions of elderly people areas little as a penny a week becauseparties’ proposals, no one will bec failing to receive the pensionsthey haven't paid enough nationaldenied help simply because of theircountry inthe world, they've earned - and deserve andinsurance. From the age of 75 weage or who they live with - everyoneso many pensioners, need - because of demeaning andwill give pensioners our increasedwill only pay what they can afford. ticularly old unworkable means tests. Liberal‘Citizen's Pension’ as of right, Many severely disabled people fee! particularly order
Democrats will simplify the system, making sure that 2.8 million womenthe cold intensely and cannot affordwomen, are trapped immediately guaranteeing a basicpensioners have security and dignityto heat their homes adequately, F pension at 75 of at least £lO9.45 per in retirement. despite the fact that the cold willinsomuch poverty.
week, with future increases linked toBecoming a parent for the first time I often make their conditions worse. left the Labour Party earnings. That's over £lOO a monthisa daunting and expensive task. We will help severely disabled peoplecac more at 75 for every single pensioner. Giving new working parents moreof working age with their fuel billsand joined the Liberal
Every pensioner couple over 75 willToo often, pensioners are forcedto I supporthasbenefitsforthem, their - by giving them the same £2OO a yearDemocrats four years receive at least £l67. O5 per week state pay huge Council Tax bills despitebabies, their employers and theWinter Fuel Payment that pensionersago because the pension - over £l4O amonth morebeing on low incomes, and manyeconomy. Liberal Democrats will give receive. We will also implement than at present. This will abolish the will be faced with further massiveworking families having their firstthe recommendations of the Royalmore I saw Labour need for means tests altogether fora increases due to revaluation. child increased maternity pay forCommission on Long-Term Care tofai ling in action, the million people. Replacing Council Tax with Localthe first six months atthe rateofthe I guarantee free personal care for: J
Income Tax means eight outoften I minimumwage-that’s £l7Oaweek -_ people with disabilities who need it. more I realised it instead of £lO2.8O at present, a lotwas time to face the
“Every week I am contactedsanctions, introducing computermore just when parents really need it. truth: that the Liberal by people needing help withsystems’ that don’t work - and problems caused by the unfairyet have still failed to tackle theMore than 6O, OOO workers workedDemocrats are now a andfrauds effectively. for companies that have gone out oftheon ly party Ican
“Before entering Parliament, I wasThe present New Deal leaves toobusiness saving insuiticent money intrust to deliver the
“I receive letters from pensionersProfessor of Social Policy at Bathmany people on unnecessary Oreirpension un 5. We WIN Dosterj in poverty, struggling with unfair -_ University, studying the mistakesineffective schemes rather thanthe Government's compensationdecent pensions, and and demeaning means tests, orgovernments kept making. Sincegetting them into real Jobs perascheme to make sure that theseabove all the free care
Femocrats will instead tailor theworkers are compensated at theOar
Nias pee a on ra ag ‘is eral eeassistance so that jobseekers receivesame level available under the newwhen it’s need ed, to even the basic pension simplydevelop alternatives that willthe package of “upport they need ‘ilpension rroteron Fund. dake f9 uarantee everyone
F_. get proper, permanent work. We wiabour, we will give proper time for-+ because eeee eee i"also scrap benefit sanctions whichconsultation before making changesd Je) ity and security In when they are disabled or loseeave genuine claimants unable to to existing public sector pensionretirement.
“Then there are letters fromtheir job, anda decent start forfeed and house themselves. schemes, and we will honour the" 4 people who want work toevery child. These principles ofentitlements already built up.\ \ support themselves, fobbed offfairness and opportunity are\ \ with government ‘New Deal’close to the hearts of the British schemes that just don't givepeople, and are values heldoeee them the training and skillsdeeply by Liberal Democrats. InThe CSA is failing. Some parentsEach year, around £3 billion is lost toClaire Rayner they need to get a job. LettersBRCOGh en chectcotnticcintineare required to pay an unrealisticthe taxpayer due to fraud and errorPresident of the Patients from workers who are angryworld, we should not settle foramount for maintenance, whilstin the social security system - £lOO forAssociation and member of that they have been robbedless.”other payments are never enforced. -_ every taxpayer every year. The newthe Royal Commission on of their company pensions. We would scrap the CSA and handtax credits could adda further £l.6Long-Term Care for the Elderly
Letters from people with severeover its initial assessment andbillion to that loss. We will reverse dies lita win srmencaaiens! Kcgd-enforcement functions to the Inland -_ the spread of mass means-testing, end because of the bureaucracyRevenue so that payment is enforced simplify the benefits and tax credit and complexity of the benefitsSteve Webbfairly and effectively. Specialsystem, and extend fraud prevention system. ibcralinemocranshadonncircumstances would be addressedand detection activities to all benefits,
Secretary of State forby appeal to a specialist tribunalreducing both fraud and error.
“We are all growing older. Work and Pensions
Anyone can be suddenly disabled. These days no jobFy ee, ee is for life. Everyone wants toPs, - Z know that there is a safety neta F if they, or their family, need it_ il
- but equally, no one wants toI i pay benefits to cheats, or keepiy- *- people on the dole longer than f"ogee necessary.* al -ee
“Yet, over and over again“i successive governments have just°s a; complicated the system, hittingrz decent people with unfair andi demeaning means tests andia_least matches inflation. We will help protect the built environment byF
“areducing VAT on historic building;"On top of the Chancellor's plansrepairs. Wewill increase grassroots“In the nineteenth "ato increase Council Tax yet again, sports funding, and support the UK's..® Council Tax revaluation in England 2Ol2 Olympic and Paralympic bid. century Liberals used
*7a, in 2OO7 threatens one in three house-local democracy to
I_Be holds with huge and arbitrary rises, wa:
le ikAia II ca ) asis already happening in Wales. transform our cities,
-bys4 Ae (a > The Council Tax penalises pensionersdelivering for the first ibs.-) andpeople on low incomes, whoWe will free local councils from many:. a p c7\pay a far higher proportion of their -_ of the stifling controls of centraltime clean water and iounci/ t axhe income in Council Taxthanthe very - governmentso that they can inno-sewers public health
7rich. A Local Income Tax is basedvate and deliver services that meet’.
ie7tI eeevery simply on the ability to pay. Itlocal people's real needs. Councilsand education, power
_LFwould be run through the existing -_ will become genuinely accountableand transport Inthe
Inland Revenue Income Tax mecha- to their local communities rather.,
“Villages, towns, cities, countiesa home and the number ofnism, so saving hundreds of millions than being agents of Whitehall. Totwenty-first century,
~weall live in communities. Ashomeless families is at a recordof pounds by abolishing CouncilTax cut bureaucracy and increase effecwe need to strip away local people, we know what'shigh. While the Conservativesadministration. The typical household _ tiveness we would go much further good in our own community -sold off affordable homes, willsave around £45O peryear, and - than Labour or the Tories to cutcentral govern ment and what's bad. When things go Labour cut the numberseight out of ten pensioners willhave - the burden of inspections, merging.::. redta pean wrong, we want them put right, being built. That’s why I’m solower bills. eight government inspectorates Intod and to hold those in charge todetermined to help create newone a streamlined andindependent I UNelected Quangos, account if they're not. opportunities for people toudit Commission. and set communities afford their first home..
the people taking decisionsare “Itmakesnosense to me thatnowsing crisis by tnaking avaliablereinvigorate local people who actually use theirlocal decisions are takenpublic sector land currently owne:
local schools or hospitals, andby distant bureaucrats orby the Ministry of Defence, theSSIMIIGSS on the frontcare about them. They are locally _ politicians who don’t knowDepartment of Health and English Over 3,5OO post offices have closedline, and to hold those elected people, who earn yourlocal services, and will neverPartnerships, sufficient to buildunder Labour, and hundreds moreibII trust when they get it right, oruse them. And I will neverlOO, OOO more homes both forare due to be axed. Thousands alsoresponsible properly are thrown out if they get itaccept that local taxes shouldrent and for affordable purchaseclosed under the Conservatives. accountable.” wrong. impoverish families andthrough shared ownership schemes Our priority is to secure a viable pensioners, or that millionsfor local people. We will reformfuture for the post office network,
“Yet successive Conservativeshould be unable to afford aVAT to ndreusce developers toby developing a business plan.) vnry on and Labour governments havedecent home. It’s time to cut thesnd bs an field lane: y tn th 9based on providing a « be Dination stripped power from localWhitehall red tape and absurdane drownmelqiane, rater manof commercial services, benetitsSimon Hughes ts..; building on greenfields anderoding _ transactions and government.
communities. Ministers andrules. Bring ina fair system,;;; anPresident of the re::; the countryside. We will takeinformation. This will help keep:
officials in Whitehall take allfor paying for local services..: Liberal Democrats al5O, OOO homebuyers a year out ofmore post offices open. We will the key decisions now, overHelp and encourage voluntaryFaean the heads of local doctinitiatihialpaying stamp duty altogether, bymaintain the obligation on Royal
‘i ven yh ochonter ves, ns olen ditraising the threshold to £l5O, OOO. Mail to provide universal same-price po a" c ne 5° ae i ersnions Inc ra Oca FA aIn areas where second homes aredelivery of letters throughout the UK.
me wh ever visiting eunions. In other wor s, tt stimeoverwhelming the local housing ee S, rae or policeoe local plies to; market, we will require people to stations that are so precious toake their own decisions again. get planning permission before their communities. turning another full-time home into a holiday home.
“Worse still, they've imposed anSO \eY unfair tax system for all this. Thehue ~\‘
Council Tax was dreamt up byEdward Davey the Conservatives, but LabourLiberal Democrat Shadow _Liberal Democrats have a proud has made it even worse, withSecretary of State for the Officetradition of championing the bills rocketing. It sjustnot right I ofthe Deputy Prime Ministerarts, culture and heritage, which to force people on incomes assuccessive governments have low as £l2, OOO a year to handundervalued. This Government's over an average of a thousand*move towards greater state pounds or more in Council Tax.-interference in the arts has
Now millions are threatenedthreatened to stifle artistic freedom.
with huge further increasesWe will restore the National Lottery in Council Tax if Labour and_-fund's independence, requiring
Conservative plans to revalue5the Department for Culture, our homes and change theMedia and Sport to separate
Council Tax bands go aheadIclearly government spending from
- it's already hit Wales. independently determined Lottery spending in its annual reports. We
“Meanwhile more and morewill end Labour's freeze in the core young people can’t even affordArts Council budget, guaranteeing that growth in core arts funding attherealalternative.
It is often said that foreign affairs is not a determining issueI.. the transition to a fully democratic Eu RO PE in UK elections. and legitimate government,
There were no weapons of massaiming to withdraw British troops destruction, there was no seriousby the expiry of the UN mandate.. and current threat, andinspectors at the end of the year; the open-hershio of thhas were denied the time they needed __ ended presence of coalition forcesMembership of the EU has been
But on this occasion the conduct to finish their job. Thousands ofis destabilising and fuels thehugely important or British jobs, soldiers and civilians have beeninsurgency. environmental protection, equality of Britain S foreign affairs, killed and it has cost the UK overngns, and Britain’s place in the
FFF£3.5 billion. Britain must neverworld. But with enlargement to particularly In relation to lraq, again support an illegal militaryBuenty- five member states the
Fintervention. But by invading IraqEU needs reform to become more goes rg ht to the heart of thethe Government has imposed on us The best way to achieve securityefricient and more accountable.
hillamoral obligation to work towards and to tackle the threat fromThe new constitution helps to
La bou i Govern ment S cred bi I Ity. astable, secure and free lrag. We - terrorismisthrough international achieve this by improving EU welcome the recent elections. action. Britain must work through coherence, strengthening the
“Both at home and abroad trustthrough aid, debt relief andWe will seek to strengthen andthe United Nations, asacommitted Powers of the elected European has been eroded, and Britain'strade. We can pursue the causeenlarge Iraqi security forces somember of the EU, and with theParliament compared with the reputation diminished. It needof human rights wherever theythat they can assume greaterUS to promote international law, Council of Ministers, allowing not have beenso. Britain, asaare abused and neglected. responsibility, include Sunni leaders democracy and respect forhuman _ Proper oversight of the unelected member of the G8, theSecurity “We cantruly put ourselves atinthe political process, andensure _ rights. We will work to reformCommission, and enhancing the
Council of the United Nations, the heart of Europe and at theadequate provision of food, water, the UNand the EU to make themrole of national parliaments. It the European Union, NATORoar nouhisucherga, Woesanitation and health care for allmore responsive to internationalalso more clearly defines and limits and the Commonwealth, hasmake sure that British armsthe Iraqi people. We willsupport -_challenges. the powers of the EU, reflecting aunique opportunity to be aexports neither encouragediversity and preventing overforce for good in the world. conflict nor assist repression. Wecentralisation. We are therefore
British practice has been one ofcan fashion a new relationshipclear in our support for the operating through multilateralwith the United States: aconstitution, which we believe is in institutions - and experiencepartnership of influence, notBritain's interest - but ratification shows that when Britain doesone of uncritical subordination. immust be subject to a referendum of this, it provides leadership andWe can base foreign policy on‘we on ISGe! athe British people.
influence. liberal values, respect for theF‘ rule of law, and human rights. rA7 I":
“But Britain was taken to waraid Ze against Iraq without express“I believe that only in this wayi. i
UN authority and ona flawedcan we maximise Britain'sL prospectus. The Governmentinfluence, and restore Britain's built its case on unreliablereputation.” intelligence, in circumstances of. aa4*)i doubtful legality. Who would; VUl have thought that Labour[iro bophoree"ie would lead the country into ai, war which has been comparedSir Menzies Campbell“'''"' to the fiasco of Suez? ae een eeeThe other parties like to posture. We think it’s time for
Foreign Secretares
“This must never be allowed omssnwe)common sense. In the modern world, Britain is more to happen again. The work of:
rebuilding trust and confidenceprosperous and secure in Europe. But we need to make should begin immediately.:
We can start by committingEurope work more effectively - through more democracy, ourselves to the reforms of theLI
United Nations set out inthemore openness, less waste, and less bureaucracy. That's igh-Level Panel's sagacious. osee report. We can influence theour Liberal Democrat vision for a strong Britain in a strong whole of the Middle East by an..” unwavering commitment to7Europe, a powertul voice in the world.
peace between Israel and the
Palestinians. We can sharpenISajjad Karim & Fiona Hall lie teas ohn ass seems er thisLiberal Democrat Members of the European Parliament poorest countries in the worldD EFENCE; N; E RNA;; O NALiberal Democrats are committed to realising a world free from on, and British forces must alwayspoverty. In order to achieve the UN be able to deal with emergencies atMillennium Development Goals home, such as terrorism or naturalby 2Ol5 (which include tackling
Britain's armed forces protect thedisasters. extreme poverty and hunger, country and are a force for goodproviding universal primary in the world. But with increasing“Liberal Democratinternational “Weneed to reformeducation, and combating HIV/ overseas commitments, they aredevelopment policy is builtinternational institutions toAIDS) the UK needs to provide overstretched. The Governmenton two foundations. First, make them more responsivemore effective international should not be cutting the sizewe believe that this countryto developing country needs; assistance. Liberal Democrats will of the armed forces while at theWe will press for a new roundhas the wealth to help thosemake aid more productive; increase British aid spending from same time asking them to takeof multilateral arms reductionmuch poorer than ourselves, make trade fairer; and takeO.35 per cent of Gross National on ever more difficult tasks. Newtalks, retaining the UK’s currentandshouldidoso. Second. weaction to promote goodIncome today to at least O.5 per equipment continues to arrive late minimum nuclear deterrent for thebelieve that we all benefit fromgovernance, the rule of lawcent by 2OO7/O8, and set out and over-budget, sowewillmake -_ foreseeable future, until sufficientadie ean eGaueatnebeand human rights. detailed plans for it to reach O.7 per military procurement more openprogress has been made towardsdevelopment in the poorestcent by 2Oll at the latest.
and competitive. By switchingthe global elimination of suchaunitesiinweowen kh“The people of this country funding from unnecessaryweapons. Arms sales contributehave an outstanding record of programmes, for example byto conflict, so we will establish a“This country has never livedupto helping those in need around cutting the third tranche of thecross-party Parliamentary Armsthe promise itmadelongagoto the world. Itis time for our;
Eurofighter programme, we willbe Export Committee to monitor armsdevote O.7 per cent of its annualgovernment to match theirWorking through the EU and the able to invest more in protectingexports and scrutinise individualincome to aid: itis time that itcommitment.”World Trade Organisation, we the welfare of the armed forces, licence applications. We willdid. The response of the Britishwill seek to remove the subsidies ensuring that they are well-trained -_ require arms brokers to registerpeople to the Asian tsunami)and tariff barriers that prevent and well-equipped. We will seekunder a code of conduct anddisaster was extraordinarily4kothe poorest countries in the world new ways of sharing the military revoke the licences of those whogerierouse burevenyceyJA CSOselling their goods on fair terms.
burden, by working with alliesbreak the code. We will support themillions of families around theWe will work to end the dumping through NATO and the EU. Liberal -_ establishment of an Internationalworldere caughtupimeinilerTom Brakeof subsidised agricultural exports
Democrats will be realistic aboutArms Trade Treaty. tragedies of famine, droughtLiberal Democrat Shadowby developed economies which what Britain can, and should, takewar and terrible poverty. SoSecretary of State foris wrecking meg In Aria itis time Britain lived up to itsInternational Developmentand other parts of the wor ‘ promises, to build the sustainable; We will work to make sure that developmentto end suchatagreements to liberalise new poverty once and for all. sectors proceed on a genuinely voluntary basis, without undue
“But it is not just about aid. Forpressure on developing countries.
example, opening EuropeanWe will require companies markets to the products of thebenefiting from open markets poorest countries helps theirto behave responsibly, and we oeamemacsand Maethema outhwill promote a new international of poverty. Stopping subsidisedagreement to encourage
European food being dumpedinvestment, particularly inthe helps their farmers prosperrepoorest countries.
and grow more. Neither policyF would cost a penny.
ce Den; fro* ~~ f
5 is5Saa" jayiO £
NG; iy '; Saintly f filiq oe 7ii
[ye 7 Tee\ om _. Ia* ii aala an- I:
aFrJI
Ihn,
A nt' -_r i- *
Ii. Potherealalternative. "isAnimal Welfare Act to guarantee ieFsPyI Of every pound consumers spendhigh standards of animal welfare borahj2on food in supermarkets just eightacross the board for farm livestock, iif'_pence goes to the farmer. Liberalworking animals and domestic pets,
Democrats will introduce alegal duty and will close the loophole in existing oEto trade fairly, supported by a Food legislation which allows people who
_aeehdTrade Inspector within the Officeof I have been banned from keeping
PaPl peFair Trading. This will protect farmers - animals still to own them if someone a raryI ry}and consumers from unfair practices else has ‘custody’. "I i._teby supermarkets and processing l. EEFr7 ia; companies. l ia]
-. The CAP fails to protect the interestsis:
4. of rural communities, family farmsi-
“isand the environment. We will press
JIwithin the EU to speed up reform soa. that the public funding available isZa
I ice asiFA! used to provide public benefits. Theseie
Le. i}aPshould include improved access anda-
*i. i Ome, aeenvironmental protection, support
44for traditional farming and organicJ
IFr4, if aah siPeed er rsystems and new opportunities,.
Cehefor agricultural products and locallam passionate riaz7"markets. We will use the UK's CAP
-l “ -_a“" *flexibility to support family farms andabout the beauty of eeei abeaid new entrants more effectively. our landscape, and ae tethe communities who as eeaotlive within it. The
“Successive governments - it didn’t just start withcountry. Ieee haherretpolicies th roug hout
Labour - have failed rural Britain. We will seek early further reform::
“I came into Parliament to champion the peopleof the Common Fisheries Policythis man ifesto are
“Until about a decade ago the majority of ruralwho live in the kind of rural communities I grew upto give local fishermen and otherabout protecting the communities were traditionally Conservative, butin and now represent. Our manifesto offers a fairstakeholders a real say in the; ia; environment and under Conservative governments thousands of rural deal - at last - for Britain's rural communities. management of their own regional..
schools, post offices, police stations and other ruralwaters. We will introduce a MarinereI nvigorating local services and facilities were closed or withdrawn. oAct to create a marine planningservices proving to
Much council housing was sold off and local workingsystem to resolve problems ofh’ bey families found themselves unable to find anconflicting uses of the sea andme that the Libera affordable home in many communities. sea bed. This would establishDemocrats are the only conservation zones for highlyhnel
“The Conservatives’ mishandling of the BSE crisishas I Andrew Georgesensitive areas and strengthenparty that genuinely cost the country dearly. The Conservatives alsosaw -__ Liberal Democrat Shadow Secretary of State forSphins porpoisecandothershares my concern
UK fishermen as expendable when negotiatingRural Affairs and Food"ee_ entry to the Common Fisheries Policy, which leftendangered marine wildlife. the real pel) of the both fish stocks and fishermen hopelessly under-cou ntryside.
protected.
“But under Labour things have gone from badpera Democrats willestabiish anoke. Re HE to worse. Record numbers of farmers have leftbringing all animal welfare matters; farming altogether. Labour has failed to stem theunder the responsibility ofaKate Parminter continuing decline in local services and the lack of; dedicated overt bod y with the dutFormer Chief Executive of the affordable accommodation. The unfair fundingaTtomake sure that air protection yCampaign to Protect systems introduced by the Conservatives, which! laws are properly enforced and keptRural England penalise health, education and police in ruraliup to date. We will introduce a new areas, have worsened under Labour.
“land my family come from a background ofLon farming and fishing in my constituency. But! doI not believe that you need to have been born and"I brought up ina rural way of life to recognise that the Conservatives represent a countryside for the“i privileged few, whilst Labour are completely outa of touch with rural needs and way of life. It is nocoincidence that Liberal Democrat MPs represent* many of the most rural constituencies in the7~- aeite tyof edand Wales. We will implement
I ie ie5this policy, and we will in additionayy aConservative privatisation leftprovide all pensioners, disabledLike everyone else sing_-the railways ina mess, but Labour _people, familiesandyoung people I WhO drives a Car, takes aFTr Bihasn't solved the problems. with their rail discount cards free. a train or uses the.4: Whilst delays have doubled,.
-~-abureaucracy has increased fivefold, tube -asIIdotwicea
2a7rawhile services are being cut. day -Isuffer weekin rali_, Liberal Democrats will streamline
7i’\._“the system, with fewer, largerIn office, Labour has nowweek-out the mess
_EI7. afranchises, givenlonger contracts _ increased road building, whileConservative and
_h %~~inreturn for more investmentand - the Conservatives’ plans would é‘", betterservices. We will use savings concrete over an area half theLabour governments aa yo7+, fromthe roads budget to prioritise size of London with new roads. have made of i<nnigsafety at stations, and to restoreBoth their approaches mean more.
la -the key rail upgrades postponedor traffic and pollution, not less. Wepublic transport
_-“cancelled under Labour. will not proceed with major newin this country.
igroad-building schemes unless iaethe benefits are clear, includingMore and more i: environmental and safety factorstraffic congestion iaand a full assessment of alternative.
public transport schemes. destroys quality of
“Good transport in all forms is vital I wherever possible, and weFor many people, particularly inResources switched from the roadslife and wrecks the to asuccessful economy -yetneed a charging regime for carrural areas, cars are a necessityprogramme will be used to increase.; governments, both Tory anduse - not ownership - whichand cannot be replaced byinvestment in public transport, environment, whilst
Labour, have failed to deliverreflects both congestion andpublic transport. But they canand we will promote safer cycletrain services are ever it. The Tories created the messneed. be far less damaging to theand pedestrian routes throughout the country’s in, particularlyenvironment when they use lesstowns and cities. In addition, wemore crowded and with their privatisation of the“Small local changes can makefuel or alternative fuels. We willwill encourage the developmentunreliable. Simply put, railways. Labour promised toabig difference. Liberalstart by reforming the Vehicleof freight interchanges to facilitate..
get Britain moving again, butDemocrats are campaigningExcise Duty system (‘road tax’)growth in rail freight, and we willLiberal Democrats will have only made things worse. upanddownthecountrytore- _- to cut tax altogether on carsdevelop a shipping, ports andhelp people get from
Promises to cut traffic have failed open railway stations and lines. that pollute least, funded bywaterways strategy. Ate Reeve to materialise, and fewer trainsMaking stations safer won'tincreasing it on those that polluteto B sate y without arrive on time. cost much, but it will mean thatmore. Congestion chargingundue delay, and eople feel more secure andin London (first proposed by..
“Like me, the British peoplewil be more likely to travel bythe Liberal Democrats) has cutTo encourage more fuel-efficientwithout wrecki ng the know that things can't go onrail. pollution, cut traffic jams andaircraft and discourage half-environment.” like this. We need a governmentpaid for new investment inempty planes we will press for that will take these problems“I can't guarantee that everybuses. We will encourage moreinternational agreement onCT seriously. One which acceptstrain will always run on timecities and towns where trafficextending emissions trading tooreHee fa both that transport needs-but I can guarantee that acongestion isa problemtoextend _ aviation, while at the same time to work and that it must liveLiberal Democrat governmentcongestion charging, linked toimplementing per-aircraft ratherLynne Featherstone within its environmental means. will work to get Britain movingup-front investment in betterthan per-passenger charges. WeChipotnne
Any strategy which does notagain.”public transport, to give millionswill oppose the construction ofGreater London Assembly recognise these self-evidentareal alternatives to the car andinternational airports on new sites, Transport Committee truths is doomed to failure.<to reduce the need to drive. Inand also the expansion of airports the longer term, as technologyin the South East. We will end "I live in one of the most ruralSFP‘allows, we will scrap petrol dutiesthe regulation on busy national constituencies in the country. aoand VED altogether, replacingairports which results in retail
Here the car is anecessity, notJohn Thursothe revenue with anationalroad _rentssubsidising landing charges a luxury. But when! aminLiberal Democrat Shadowuser charging system based onand encouraging congestion and
Westminster, public transportSecretary of State for Transportlocation, congestion and pollution _ pollution. We will protect essential is amuch more convenient way(including the level of pollution oflifeline routes to remote UK of getting about. It is blindinglythe particular vehicle). Asaresult, I Communities.
obvious that the same solutionspollution and congestion will be don’t apply in both areas. better targeted, with no need for the present system of heavy taxes
“So we need to be moreon every journey.
creative. Our ideas for transport are all aboutresponding to differing localal needs, and helping people do the right things for the~ environment, rather thanLiberal Democrats were the first just taxing everyone more.:’I to make the case for giving all
We need to provide betterpensioners and disabled people public transport alternativesfree off-peak local bus travel, and aohave already done so in Scotlandtherealalternative.
i' ‘io iover war and peace - subject torepresent their community. We
\parliamentary accountability, will extend this fair voting system“Since being elected
In recent decades Prime Ministersincluding bringing in a War Powersto all local elections in Britain, and.
aehave exercised a growing domination Actto require Parliament's authority to the House of Commons, Scottishto Parliament I have over the political system, insufficiently before a government takes Britainto Parliament and National Assemblybeen appal led by how accountable to Parliament or thewar. A Civil Service Act will introduce for Wales. At the age people cana people. We will curb this excessivea barrier to politicisation of the civilmarry, leave school and start work, unrepresentative It Is concentration of power. We willservice. We will also strengthen the they will have the right to vote. Weand how easily it has cut back the powers of patronage, powers of Parliament to scrutinisewill review the European electoralF in particular through our plans forthe actions of the Government, system so people can choose theirbeen manipulated a predominantly elected secondenhancing the Select CommitteeMEPs personally, rather than just voteby the Govern ment, chamber. We will make the Royalsystem. by party list as at present. Reform of. os.
Prerogative powers which the Primethe House of Lords has been botchedculminating in Blair
Minister exercises - such as decisionsby Labour, leaving it unelected andtaking Britain to war even more in the patronage of theF bilaWe will cut the excessive numberof - Prime Minister. We will replace itona false premise.; government departments andreduce withapredominantlyelectedsecond I That's why Liberal
Every time youopenanewspaper I have never felt so worriedthe number of government ministers chamber.:
orsee the news, the Government about the safety of Britishby over a third. We will also moveDemocrats will curb seems to be taking more powerdemocracy. It is being erodedgovernment bureaucracy out ofthe power of the for itself, andin particular forthe _ bit by bit. Only the oppositionLondon, saving money on office rents...
Prime Minister. parties in the House of Lords, and spreading wealth and jobs morePrime Minister. And and some independent cross-equally through the UK. The savings __Liberal Democrats have led the waywe'll introduce a fair
“Itstarted with Mrs. Thatcher. ttbenchers, saved the countrywill be ploughed back into betterin arguing for devolution to Scotland,.
has got worse since Tony Blairfrom a regime of detentionpublic services. Wales and Northern Ireland. Wevoting system, so that became Prime Minister. His Policy withouttrial, determined notbelieve that people in those parts ofParliament better
Unit at No. lO Downing Streetby judges but by ministers. Upthe UK, rather than the government:
tells ministers what to do. Histo now, that kind of behaviourin London, should take the decisionsrepresents the views
Cabinet no longer makes the keyonly happened in tyrannies likeonissues that affect them directly. We I of Britain and better decisions; he does. The House ofPinochet's Chile, or Verwoerd’sOur priority isto make local services, _ will therefore strengthen the powersaT.
Commons is no longer supreme; South Africa. like health and education, workof the Northern Ireland Assembly andreflects its d Iversity - it is treated as a rubber-stamp, better for people. That means thatextend primary legislative powerswith more women and rather than as the people’s“The arrogant abuse of powerlocal communities need to have more _ to the National Assembly for Wales.:
representatives to whommust be stopped, by restoringinfluence and say over the majorIn consultation with the Scottisha greater proportion of government is accountable. cabinet government, protectingissues affecting them. So we willParliament, we will consider how toethnic minority MIPs.”; the independence of civilstrengthen local democracy, taking -_extendiits role.
“Local councils are controlledservants, giving greater powerpower down from Whitehall and by centrally imposed rules andto local government, andreducing central interference and:
regulations, or bypassed byensuring that Parliament hasthe burden of inspection. The powers government-appointed boardsthe time to do its crucial jobof many unelected regional andSandra Gidle and quangos. I remember theof holding the executive tonational quangos and administrators The BBC has, over the last eightylise Democrat remarkable record of greataccount. will be given to cities and counties, years, made a major contributionSpokesperson for Women towns and counties in the past, Iincluding returning to Countyto Britain's democracy, culturea and the pride local people“Liberties, once lost, are rarelyCouncils their strategic planningand standing in the world. The felt in them. Why does therestored. The freedom of therole. The healthcare planningLiberal Democrats will make sureand introduce a new, independent
Government so undermineindividual lies at the heartrole of Primary Care Trusts will beit remains the world’s leadingexternal regulator appointed by them? of liberal democracy, andgiven to elected local social services publicservice broadcaster-strong, Parliament, to make sure that all we Liberal Democrats areauthorities. We will streamlineindependent, and securely funded. Publicservice broadcasters live up to
“Professional men and women, determined to defend it.”remaining regional functionsBut the regulation of the BBC hastheir obligations to the public.
like doctors, teachers andVJlleer-into a single agency, increasingbeen insufficiently independent of nurses are constantly told byShiaccountability to the local community _ its own management, and of the the Government exactly whatthrough an executive comprisingGovernment. Labour's proposals fail they should do. The blizzard.. councillors elected from the cities and to address this. Liberal Democrats of orders and directives isShirley Williamscounties, rather than appointed by -_will scrap the current governmentrelentless. Today we have theFormer Liberal Democratthe Secretary of State. Underpinning appointed Board of Governors, nanny state with a vengeance. Leader in the House of Lordsthese reforms will be anew system for dividing up government funding
“Yet the Government does notfairly within the UK, so that the have a popular majority for: system is fair for the nations and what it is doing. Even in 2OOl, regions according to their real needs.
the last election, only four out of ten voters supported it. If_" Britain had a fair voting system,7
Labour would HEMASH have hadLiberal Democrats will improve and its current huge majority ofJstrengthen the UK’s democratic parliamentary seats. systems. Liberal Democrats in:. Igovernment in Scotland are already
“Ihave served in Parliament forhbringing in the single transferable thirty years, nearly twenty in thevote (STV) system for local elections,
Commons and ten in the Lords.-:~ so that local councillors will genuinelyD 4% 4 ria a iLs: iI ry it taI: E -; 5an,
-fh ife is**yPy Ty
7 _is -_
5FE a _r; j: <I rajeroe n> bed” ela
Ae ye Axa ie caps, Mead. h.
A aei ‘7, vehi uiear'eae, rPm7unomeIP hiargat oie bor Th if fi} "a ' f:”
Ry i al i hS i rooo. allt "4i.
a iaT f A. r:! J a aa«a_F
The Eden Project helps people learn about environmental sustainability.
Concern for the environmenttransport and this documentZ has always been a core Liberalincludes plans to promote public
Democrat value. Our policies aretransport, especially the railways.
focused on three main areas: However, pollution can also be cut by reducing domestic waste and promoting recycling. Pioneering
Liberal Democrat controlled local
Catastrophic climate change isauthorities are leading the way the major environmental threatin cutting unnecessary waste and to the planet. Urgent action iswe will expand these practices needed. Liberal Democrat plansnationally.
will make sure that Britain achieves its targets from the Kyoto Protocol
(the international agreement onF the pollution that causes climate change) well before the deadline. I Energy use is the main sourcemystF
Britain and the EU must take the of greenhouse gas emissionsIjoined the Liberal lead on negotiations for the next and hazardous waste. We willParty twenty-five years set of targets for greenhouse gasintroduce measures to reduce emissions. It is vital that we include -_ energy use overall - for exampleeye because they WHINE the US and Australia but we alsothrough better home insulationfig hting a local Tory countries. Our long-term goal ispoverty’ faced, in particular, by.
‘contraction and convergence’pensioners. We will make surerubbish du mps close
Kbps oe whichmeansagreeingforevery _ that at least 2O per cent of the UK'sto people's homes country asustainable population- _ electricity derives from a range:
related allowance for emissions. of renewable sources by the year-action speaks
2O2O. Finally, given their long-termlouder than words.
problems of cost, pollution and safety, we will not replace existingNow the world nuclear power stations as theyfaces catastrophic
Pollution and congestion have areach the end of their safe and.
major impact on people’s healtheconomic operating lives. We willclimate change, our 'and quality of life, as well as onuse renewables and save energycommitment to the climate change. Many of theinstead.:
-solutions to these problems involveenvironment has never
-_mattered more. ”
Tackle climate change - cleaner
FIdSue Doughty tra nsport, cleaner energy anLiberal Democrat Shadow. Ministerial Spokesperson, a Cleaner environment. DEFRA (Environment)a --- 7 haieee ee lO GOOD REASONS TO
+ Lsag Fjsa alli acede "hel, Pe ri tfAs wen VOTE LIBERAL DEMOCRAT
Ffanal]
--i* IPutting targets first irIlCs...
wit ocratsa 5Putting patients first thee Chwans 2.--Tuition fees & Topup fees
5. ae, la4Prt,.
I: ii+ ‘4: Scrapping student fees
Ii aq 4i I~ pe: affCompulsory I. D. cards
Finf 5 oe I“ ~ JSpending the money on lO, OOO more police
TSA_7 i, f. yhs feSelling your home to pay for care
¥ad i; 7+Free personal care for the elderly
--Liana li ‘i eet dIgnoring climate change se! -Cleaner transport & cleaner energy
7£l.5 billion on the child trust fund
La,£l.5 billion towards reducing class sizes iMeans-testing pensioners
4ae..
iiy£lOO extra per month starting with the over 75s
}yeaFa I iHidden tax increases
&iniOnly one tax increase - on income above £lOO, OOO per year wyM4IUnfair Council Tax;:-Local Income Tax, saving typical households £45O per year tfBush & Blair on Iraq
---afillNever again nBRHRieeHEteHRieHmthehmMUmUMULhlMUMmUeELCUCU UuUaGESEL_LUCUUeELUCUUaSELlUlCUUeSLlClCUe lca lle le lClCrUreaeEerllClCcrerlClUreaeaelmUlUmrerlCUcmerllClvreaeErllClUmreEclClCvLreaeErlUClUCreaerlUmlUcreaeaErlmlCrerllCl Leelee
The Liberal Democrats are theVisit our website /support - or return this form.
ifyo aie at ms fonMl / wish to make a contribution to the campaign of:
you like what we stand for, your support mmmMflOO HM£s5O i f2O Mi £lO i Other can makeli / enclose a cheque payable to the Liberal Democrats difference-' Ili Please debit my Credit Card/Switch (Maestro) card:
MsBREE ER Ee ee ee
\Start dote i EGE expiry doce HR
\Issue no (Switch/Maestro): Mi HE signe gaNore a)Address pEno!: Telephone. Please return to: Charles Kennedy, FREEPOST, Liberal Democrats, kea.4 Cowley Street, London, SWlP 3BR
Published and promoted on behalf of the Liberal Democrats by Chris Rennard, Liberal Democrats, 4 Cowley Street, London, SWlP 3NB. Printed on recycled paper by Mortons, Newspaper House, Morton Way, Horncastle, Lincs. LN9 6JR