Fat el; fF ak re rI
STRONG LEADERSHI
LEAR ECONO I LAN
AB I HTER, MORE SECURE FUTURE
Conserva ivesTHE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5
Contents
FOREWORD by David Cameron - Leader of the Conservative Party... O. OOOOOOOOOOOOO essen 5 l. AN ECONOMIC PLAN TO HELP YOU AND YOUR FAMILY
A strong economy to help you and your family7
Better roads, trains and modern communicationsl4
2. JOBS FOR ALL
Jobs for alll7
3. CUTTING YOUR TAXES, MAKING WELFARE FAIRER AND CONTROLLING IMMIGRATION
Cutting your taxes and building a fairer welfare system25
Controlled immigration that benefits Britain29
4. THE BEST SCHOOLS AND HOSPITALS FOR YOU AND YOUR FAMILY
Giving your child the best start in life33
Protecting and improving our National Health Service37
Enabling you to enjoy our heritage, creativity and sports4l
Helping you build the Big Society45
Making government work better for you47
5. SECURING YOUR HOME AND YOUR NEIGHBOURHOOD
Helping you to buy a home of your own5l
Protecting and enhancing our natural environment54
Guaranteeing you clean, affordable and secure energy supplies56
Fighting crime and standing up for victims58
Preventing terrorism, countering extremism6l
6. DIGNITY IN YOUR RETIREMENT
Dignity in your retirement65
7. KEEPING OUR COUNTRY SECURE
Stronger together: a Union for the 2lst century69
Real change in our relationship with the European Union72
A Britain standing tall in the world75
A stronger voice for our nation on the world stage76
Keeping Britain safe77
‘Tackling global challenges to make you safer and more prosperous78
CONCLUSION8l lhey
}Me ae & o l}Vv: FVtty
7 a -<a ee_ eSsTHE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5
We have a plan for every stage of your life:
FOR THE BEST START IN LIFE we will continue to increase spending on the NHS, provide 7day a week access to your GP and deliver a truly 7day NHS - so you know you will always have access to a free and high quality health service when you need it most.
FOR YOUR SCHOOL YEARS we will maintain the amount of money that follows each child into school, ensure there is a good primary school place available for every child and lift the cap on university places - so you have the skills you need to succeed.
TO SECURE YOUR FIRST JOB we will create 3 million new apprenticeships; take everyone earning less than £l2,5OO out of Income
Tax altogether and pass a law to ensure we have a Tax-Free Minimum Wage in this country; and continue to create a fairer welfare system where benefits are capped to the level that makes work pay
- so you are rewarded for working hard and doing the right thing.
AS YOU RAISE YOUR FAMILY we will extend the Right to Buy to Housing Association tenants, build 2OO, OOO new Starter Homes
- 2O per cent below the market price, for first-time buyers under 4O - and provide 3O hours of free childcare to working parents of three and four year-olds - so you are able to work while having the security of your own home in which to raise your family.
WHILE YOU GROW OLDER we will not raise VA'E, National Insurance contributions or Income Tax but we will raise the 4Op
Income Tax threshold to £5O, OOO and take the family home out of tax by increasing the effective
Inheritance ‘Tax threshold for married couples and civil partners to £l million - so you can keep more of your income and pass it on to future generations.
AND WHEN YOU RETIRE we will continue to increase the Basic State Pension by at least 2.5 per cent through the triple lock, give you the freedom to use your pension savings as you want and pass them on tax-free and we will cap the amount you can be charged for your residential care - so you can have the dignity and security you deserve in your old age.
The next Conservative Government will secure a better future for you, your family and Britain.
3i: ‘ SY % i5 iit l" l 4
‘veer erea.
iSS a7,
Fi2a.. A.
yf: TM ai,, THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5
Foreword
Over the last five years, we have put our country back on the right track. Five years ago, Britain was on the brink. As the outgoing Labour ‘Treasury Minister put it with brutal candour, ‘there is no money’. Since then, we have turned things around.
Britain is now one of the fastest growing major economies in the world. We are getting our national finances back under control. We have halved our deficit as a share of our economy. More people are in work than ever before. Britain is back on its feet, strong and growing stronger every day.
This has not happened by accident. It is the result of difficult decisions and of patiently working through our long-term economic plan. Above all, it is the product of a supreme national effort, in which everyone has made sacrifices and everyone has played their part.
It is a profound Conservative belief that our country is made great not through the action of government alone, but through the flair, the ingenuity and hard work of the British people - and so it has proved the last five years.
We can be proud of what we have achieved so far together, and especially proud that as we have taken hard decisions on public spending, we have protected the National Health Service, with 9,5OO more doctors and 6,9OO more nurses, and ensured generous rises in the State Pension.
Our friends and competitors overseas look at Britain, and they see a country that is putting its own house in order, a country on the rise. ‘They see a country that believes in itself! But our national recovery remains a work in progress. It is fragile, and with the wrong decisions, it could easily be reversed.
So the central questions at this election are these: how do we maintain our economic recovery, upon which our ambitions for our country depend? And how do we make sure that the recovery benefits every one of our citizens, at every stage of their lives?
This Manifesto sets out our plan to do just that. It is a plan for a better future - for you, for your family. It is a plan for every stage of your life. For your new-born baby, there will be the world's best medical care. For your child, there will be a place at an excellent school. As you look for your first job, we are building a healthy economy that provides a good career for you with a decent income. As you look for that first home, we will make sure the Government is there to help. As you raise your family, we will help you with childcare. And as you grow older, we will ensure that you have dignity in retirement.
Throughout, we will make sure that if you or your family fall ill, you will always be able to depend on our cherished
National Health Service to give you the care you need.
And in an increasingly dangerous and uncertain world, we will fulfil the most basic duty of government - to defend our country and keep it safe.
But all of these things depend on a strong and growing economy. So as you consider how to vote, I hope you will ask this:
which party is best placed to keep our economy strong? The team which has delivered the growing economy we have today, which created more jobs since 2OlO than the rest of the European Union put together; or the party which left behind a ruined economy just five short years ago?
Now is a time to build on the progress we have made, not to put it all at risk. ‘This Manifesto is our plan of action - our plan to take our amazing country forward. Above all, it is a plan for you.
-SOo that together, we can see through the task we have begun.
es Coo
Oe‘ >
>bh_*.» "\; - @ @s
- a ]
-_- INeLa
Hfa)
A strong economy to help you and your family2
Our commitment to you: un
Your job, your home, the mortgage you pay, the school your children go to, your local hospital, zZ your pension - all these things depend on a strong economy. So we will carry on workingfm through our long-term economic plan. We will:2 m keep our economy secure by running a surplus so that we start paying down our debtsZ. wy) increase the tax-free Personal Allowance to £l2,5OO and the 4Op Income Tax threshold to i
£5O, OOO< commit to no increases in VAT, National Insurance contributions or Income Tax m crack down on tax evasion and aggressive tax avoidance and ensure those who can afford to pay the most do m rebalance our economy, build a Northern Powerhouse and back elected metro mayors m pursue our ambition to become the most prosperous major economy in the world by the 2O3Os.
Our long-term economic plan is turning around Britain’s ‘The Great Recession has given way to a Great Revival, economy. Five years ago, Britain was reeling from thewhich is creating on average l, OOO new jobs every day:
chaos of Labour’s Great Recession; in 2Ol4 we were the - more than the rest of the European Union combined.
fastest growing of all the major advanced economies -This is no accident. It is the product of hard work by last year, we grew 75 per cent faster than Germany, three people in every part of the country and it is thanks to times faster than the Eurozone and seven times fasterthe success of our long-term economic plan. By halving than France. Five years ago, the budget deficit was more _ the deficit, we have helped to restore confidence to the than lO per cent of GDP, the highest in our peacetimeeconomy. By maintaining fiscal discipline, we have helped history, and the national debt was rising out of control; keep mortgage rates lower than they otherwise would be.
today, the deficit is half that level and debt as a share ofAnd by establishing the independent Office for Budget national income will start falling this financial year. Responsibility (OBR), we have ended - permanently - the ability of politicians to cook the books for political gain at the nation’s expense. With inflation at a record low, the
The fastest growi ng of all thelatest OBR forecasts show that living standards will be major advanced economieshigher in 2Ol5 than in 2OlO, and are set to grow strongly. every year for the rest of the decade, with the average in 2Ol4family £9OO better off. It is only by securing the recovery, dealing with our debts and creating jobs that we can continue to raise living standards. ‘That means sticking to
Industries are coming back to life. Gompanies are striding -_ our long-term economic plan; Britain is on the right path.
into new markets. Manufacturers are returning to our shores. More tech companies are starting up here thanBut the job is not finished. There are clouds on the anywhere else in Europe. We have overtaken France as the international horizon. Huge challenges remain at home.
third largest car producer in Europe and there are 76O, OOO We have cut the record deficit we inherited to five per more businesses than in 2OlO providing jobs and creating - cent of GDP, but that is still too high. Our trade with wealth across the country. emerging economies is up, with exports to China more than doubled since 2OO9, but overall we are still too
AN ECONOMIC PLAN TO HELP YOU AND YOUR FAMILY7THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5 dependent on slow-growing European markets. Businesson our long-term economic plan. Or economic chaos investment is rising, but we still underinvest comparedunder Labour, with higher taxes, more debt and no plan to other countries. Productivity remains too low. Andto fix our public finances, create jobs or build a more while prosperity is now spreading around the country, secure economy.
our economic growth remains uneven, too reliant on financial services..
l, OOO jobs created for every dayie wa Finis the job by mining the deficit of the Parliament since 2OlOto keep our economy secure and keep your taxes and mortgage payments down
Our long-term economic plan reflects our values: we as a
We will finish the job we started in a balanced way. Thosenation should not be piling up and passing on unaffordable with the broadest shoulders have contributed the mostlevels of debt to the next generation. We will eliminate the to deficit reduction - which is why inequality has fallen, deficit in a sensible and balanced way that will enable us to and child and pensioner poverty are down ~ and they willcontinue to increase spending on the NHS and cut Income continue to do so. We will increase NHS spending everyTax for 3O million working people.
year. We will control spending, eliminate the deficit, and start to run a surplus. We will go from stuck in the red, toOur deficit reduction plan has two phases. The first back in the black. By building on the foundations we havewill see us continue to reduce government spending by put in place, we will have a truly national recovery and beone per cent each year in real terms for the first two full able to pursue our ambition for Britain to become the mostfinancial years of the next Parliament, the same rate as prosperous major economy in the world by the 2O3Os. over the last five years. That means saving £l a year in every £lOO that government spends. We don’t think
If we do not stick to our long-term economic plan, wethere’s a business that couldn’t do that - and we don’t will slip back again, reversing the progress we have made _ think government, when it is spending your money, in the last five years. More borrowing - and the extrashould be any different.
debt interest that it brings - means there is less money to spend on schools and hospitals. More spending means higher taxes for hardworking people, and interestWe have halved the deficit as a rates that are higher than they otherwise would be - punishing homeowners, hurting businesses, costing jobs. share of our econo my
A strong economy Allows US pac wiil require a further £3O billion in fiscal to i] nvest i na nd p rotect ourconsolidation over the next two years, on top of the..°£l2O billion that we have already identified and public services like the NHS Geiivered over this Parliament. We will find £l3 billion an d SC h reye) / Ssfrom departmental savings, the same rate of reduction as in this Parliament. We will find £l2 billion from welfare savings, on top of the £2l billion of savings
And failing to control our debt would be more than andelivered in this Parliament. And we will raise at least economic failing; it would be a moral failing - leaving£5 billion from continuing to tackle tax evasion, and our children and grandchildren with debts that theyaggressive tax avoidance and tax planning, building could never hope to repay. on the £7 billion of annual savings we have delivered in this Parliament. ‘This £3O billion of further
So you face a clear choice. Economic competence, withconsolidation is necessary to ensure that debt keeps
David Cameron as Prime Minister, following throughfalling as a share of GDP and to deliver a balanced
Fna structural current budget in 2Ol7l8, meeting the newmaking savings in welfare, and continuing to crack down fiscal mandate that Parliament voted on earlier this year. on tax evasion and aggressive avoidance. ‘This means that< we can commit to no increases in VAT; Income ‘Tax or9
Our commitment goes further than this. A balancedNational Insurance. ‘Tax rises on working people wouldai current budget is not enough to deliver a reliableharm our economy, reduce living standards and costx reduction in our level of national debt, which remainsjobs. Instead, as we reduce the deficit, we will cut Incomee far too high in a world of continuing economic‘Tax, as we have done over the last five years: during the& challenges. International evidence and Treasury analysisnext Parliament, we will increase the tax-free PersonalU shows that the only way to keep our economy secureAllowance to £l2,5OO and the higher rate threshold to2 for the future is to eliminate the deficit entirely and start£5O, OOO, so you keep more of your hard-earned money.é running a surplus. Anything less would be to ignore thev lessons of the past.4 ooThe richest are paying a greater
That is why, in the second phase of our deficit reductionshare of income tax than ina ny plan starting in 2Ol8l9, we are set to move into surplus, with the Government taking in more than it is spending forof Labour's l3 years the first time in l8 years. ‘That means we can start properly paying down our debts and reducing the scale of annual a Payments ‘Teducing the URS vulnerability °We will continue to build a stronger, safer and uture shocks by fixing the roof while the sun is shining,;;
We will achieve this by continuing to control governmentmore secure b anking sy; stem that serves its spending in 2Ol8l9, no longer cutting it in real terms, butcustomers and provides businesses with the instead growing it in line with inflation. finance they need to grow and create jobs.. We will make sure our financial services industry is the
To e I Iminate th ede f icit webest regulated in the world with our new system of must cont i nue to cut outsupervision led by the independent Bank of England.. Our new Financial Policy Committee will monitor and waste ft UIS P en d. in g an d ma k econtrol the growth of indebtedness and imbalances across go vernment more e ffi ci oO rt, the whole economy - a vital task that was totally ignored. in the run up to the financial crisis. Our tough new effe ctive an d accountahk / éFinancial Conduct Authority will protect consumers and ensure that financial markets work for the benefit of the whole economy. ‘To protect hardworking taxpayers from
From 2Ol92O, after a surplus has been achieved, future banking crashes, we will finish the process of ringspending will grow in line with GDP. A new fundamentalfencing banks’ high street branches from their investment principle of fiscal policy, monitored by the independentarms by 2Ol9 at the latest. In order to ensure that new
OBR, will ensure that in normal economic times, whenpay structures for bankers rebuild trust and reduce shortthe economy is growing, the government will always runtermism, we will ensure that Britain continues to have the a surplus in order to reduce our national debt and keeptoughest regime of bonus deferral and clawback of any our economy secure, with a state neither smaller than wefinancial centre. We will continue to sell the Government’s need nor bigger than we can afford. Total governmentstakes in the bailed-out banks and building societies spending as a share of our national income at the end ofin order to deliver value for money for taxpayers and the next Parliament is forecast to be very slightly highersupport the economy. Hardworking taxpayers supported than in the year 2OOO, the year before Labour lost allthe banks during the financial crisis and so the banks control of spending and the national debt started itsshould in turn support them during the recovery - that longest rise for hundreds of years. is why we will keep the bank levy in place and restrict established banks’ ability to pay less tax by offsetting their
Our approach is focused on reducing wasteful spending, profits against past losses.
AN ECONOMIC PLANTOHELPYOUANDYOURFAMILY sess«i ee
FTMS et: ‘a % y, Vis
“-i
- © esee7 ~
~,7" Sel I:
7 a
We will make the banks work for youtheir organisations and making sure that the penalties are
Our plan is to ensure banks help secure our recoverylarge enough to punish and deter.< and back businesses to create jobs and growth in our9 economy. We capped payday lenders, made it easierWe will rebalance our economy and build aai for you to switch your bank account and will continueNorthern Powerhouse to support the credit union movement in makinge financial services more accessible. We will continue theWe are committed to a truly national recovery, benefiting all& successful Funding for Lending scheme into 2Ol6. Weparts of our country. We have devolved powers to ScotlandU will help new and existing challenger banks to injectand Wales, and set out long-term economic plans to raise2 fresh competition into the market for personal currentthe growth rate of all parts of England, bringing areas which4 accounts, mortgages and business loans, includinghave grown more slowly up to at least the national average. Y through the British Business Bank, while backing theOver the last year, the North grew faster than the South. By2 financial technology revolution. We will improve ourconnecting up the North with modern transport links, we support for investment into start-ups and roll-out ourwill enable its great cities and towns to pool their strengths.
innovative Help to Grow scheme, which will plug a £lWe will invest a record £l3 billion in transport for the North.
billion finance gap for firms that are looking to expand, We will electrify the main rail routes, build the Northern invest and take on new employees. Hub, and provide new trains for the North. We will upgrade the Al, M62, Ml and A555 link road. And that is on top of
We will continue to lead the world on tax andour £5O billion commitment to build High Speed 2 - the transparencynew North-South railway linking up London with the West
Midlands, Leeds and Manchester - and develop High Speed
‘Tackling tax evasion and aggressive tax avoidance and3 to jo up the North. We will back scientific and technical tax planning is an important part of our long-termstrengths by creating new institutions such as Health North; economic plan. We will increase the annual tax chargesthe Royce Institute for Advanced Materials in Manchester, paid by those with non-domiciled status, ensuring thatLeeds, Liverpool and Sheffield; the National Centre for they make a fair contribution to reducing the deficit, Ageing Science and Innovation in Newcastle; the Cognitive and continue to tackle abuses of this status. We willComputing centre at Daresbury; and by making investments lead international efforts to ensure global companiesin energy research in Blackpool, Cumbria and ‘Thornton.
pay their fair share in tax, as David Cameron did at the G8 Summit in Northern Ireland in 2Ol3, whichWe will back new jobs in the South West secured significant international progress on fairer tax rules and full transparency over who really ownsTo help attract growth and new businesses we will companies. We will push for all countries to sign upimprove connections to the South West with major to the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative; investment in the M5, A358, A3O and A3O3, and review the implementation of the new internationalthe electrification of the Great Western Main Line - countryby-country tax reporting rules and consider thebringing new fast trains on the route. We will invest to case for making this information publicly available on aboost tourism in the South West and ensure the worldmultilateral basis. We will ensure developing countriesclass defence assets and cyber-security industries of the have full access to global automatic tax informationSouth West benefit the local economy.
exchange systems and continue to build the capacity of tax authorities in developing countries. We are also making it a crime if companies fail to put in place measures to stop economic crime, such as tax evasion, in
Britain's exports are growing
We are fixing the economyfastest in the North East and so that everyone feels theour employment fastest in the. yNorth West benefit
AN ECONOMIC PLANTOHELPYOUANDYOURFAMILY gg~Iro rHDI. ¢aar eaiparva a--fia eslne ih te
Ais‘aa\',
\, ysso Se l,.-p -- ’
~ -D I) ee caes
/\\\.; -‘
F “4Aaoe:
iWishJ‘ ar a i¥ ijI Br,; ~ apne 4 O2 el: AeesI a{ *l»‘ \ al, i. (ij a ff I:
ee,3ee He ui ae Safes) I, c
Pain. I i) fea oe)
CMe reP iS * a ats j 8 ye I
JPAN (we a I ae a li‘ull “A wi ‘“
5a TM, Ma a
SOW¥at as '5I j‘3)a
We will make the Midlands an engineWe support policies that grow - l8the economy as a whole,8
We will back business by investing a record £5.2 billionge ne rati n EZ new jo b Sa ndai in better transport, upgrading the Ml and M6, and°x electrifying the Midland Main Line from St Pancrashigher wages for everybo lye) to Sheffield - putting the Midlands at the centre of& a modern, inter-connected transport network for theWe will devolve powers and budgets to boostU
UK. We will back the Midlands’ strength in advancedlocal growth in England2 manufacturing, engineering and science with majorZ projects such as the Energy Research Accelerator andWe will devolve far-reaching powers over economicg support for innovation in the motor industry. development, transport and social care to large cities whichS choose to have elected mayors. We will legislate to deliver
We will properly connect the East of Englandthe historic deal for Greater Manchester, which will devolve and back innovationpowers and budgets and lead to the creation of a directly elected Mayor for Greater Manchester. In Cambridgeshire,
We will improve rail connections to East Anglia, Greater Manchester and Cheshire East, we will pilot delivering ‘Norwich in 9O minutes’ and ‘Ipswich in 6Oallowing local councils to retain lOO per cent of growth minutes’ and upgrade key roads like the All and A47. in business rates, so they reap the benefit of decisions that
We will support the creation of new jobs by backing theboost growth locally. We will devolve further powers over
East’s great strengths - agri-tech, high-tech businessesskills spending and planning to the Mayor of London.
around Cambridge, and energy businesses at GreatAnd we will deliver more bespoke Growth Deals with
Yarmouth and Lowestoft. local councils, where locally supported, and back Local
Enterprise Partnerships to promote jobs and growth.
AN ECONOMIC PLANTOHELPYOUANDYOURFAMILY sessingTHE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5
Better roads, trains and modern communications
You depend on infrastructure at every stage of your life: to go to school, to go to work, to enable businesses to grow and create jobs for your children and grandchildren. We have a plan of action that will improve our roads, railways, airports and internet connections. We will:
ms invest in infrastructure to attract businesses and good jobs across the whole of the UK m make your life easier, with more and faster trains, more roads and cycle routes mw keep commuter rail fares frozen in real terms for the whole of the next Parliament m oll out universal broadband and better mobile phone connections, to ensure everyone is part of the digital economy.
Under Labour, road and rail were starved of resources, most comprehensive and cheapest superfast broadband while too many people were stuck on the wrong side of the coverage of any major European country.
digital divide. ‘This meant packed trains, potholes, patchy broadband coverage - businesses held back and cities left.
behind. Turning these problems around takes time. Our p lan of action:
I. traidWe will spend more on infrastructure, to mproving our trains, roadsimprove your quality of life and broadband helps local
°Overall public investment will be higher on average over businesses & rowan d crecrethis decade, as a percentage of GDP, than under the more jobs and Opp ortuni. ie {whole period of the last Labour Government. We will deliver on our National Infrastructure Plan and respond to the Airports Commission’s final report.
But because we have made savings elsewhere, we have been able to make significant investments inWe will transform our railway network infrastructure. We will commit, alongside running a surplus, to increase our capital spending - investment in - We will invest £38 billion in our railway network in the five infrastructure - at least in line with our national income. __ years to 2Ol9. Electrification of the railways is a key part of
We have set out a plan to invest over £lOO billion in our _ our investment programme, with work already underway infrastructure over the next Parliament. across the North, the Midlands, and South Wales; there are plans to go further in the rest of the country, including
This will fund the biggest investment in rail sinceEast Anglia and the South West. In addition to rolling out
Victorian times, and the most extensive improvementsour national high-speed rail network, with High Speed 2 to our roads since the l97Os. And it will give us theand High Speed 3, we will complete the construction of the new east-west Crossrail across Greater London, and push forward with plans for Crossrail 2, a new rail route running
We are investin g over £2 billionthrough London and connecting Surrey and Hertfordshire.
-: We will support a fairer deal for taxpayers and commuters:
el ectrifyi Ng Our Fal lwayswe will keep commuter rail fares frozen in real terms for the whole of the next Parliament - regulated fares will only be l4a able to rise by Retail Price Inflation, and train operating companies will not have any flexibility to raise ticket pricesWe are investi ng £79O million< above this. We will also introduce smart ticketing and part-extendi ng supe rfast broadband9 time season tickets and require train companies to improve. annea compensation arrangements for passengers when trainsto rural areas - with 2 millionr are more than a few minutes late. We are investing millionsUK prem ises alrea dy connectedS of pounds in fitting out trains with new wifi equipmentand AO, OOO bein g upgra ded& and improving mobile phone signals, which will benefit* every weekZ passengers on trains across England and Wales.2
We will support motorists and invest in ourWe will deliver faster internet, to help youts roads, to save you time and money;; Zi work and communicate more easily
We abolished Labour’s fuel duty escalator, and instead have frozen fuel duty, delivering the longest duty freezeWe will secure the delivery of superfast broadband in in 2O years. We will invest £l5 billion in roads. This willurban and rural areas to provide coverage to 95 per include over £6 billion in the northern road network, cent of the UK by the end of 2Ol7, and we will ensure with the dualling and widening of the Al north ofno one is left behind by subsidising the cost of installing
Newcastle and the first new trans-Pennine road capacitysuperfast capable satellite services in the very hardest to in over 4O years. We will take action to tackle some ofreach areas. We will also release more spectrum from the most notorious and longstanding problems on ourpublic sector use to allow greater private sector access.
road network, including improvements to the A3O3, And we have set an ambition that ultrafast broadband
A47 and A27. We will add l,3OO extra lane miles to ourshould be available to nearly all UK premises as soon as roads, improve over 6O problem junctions, and continuepracticable.
to provide enough funding to fix around l8 million potholes nationwide between 2Ol5 and 2O2l. We will boost mobile coverage, so you can stay connected
We will make motoring greener and promote cycling, to protect your environmentWe will hold the mobile operators to their new legally binding agreement to ensure that 9O per cent of the UK
Our aim is for almost every car and van to be a zerolandmass will have voice and SMS coverage by 2Ol7.
emission vehicle by 2O5O - and we will invest £5OOWe will continue to invest in mobile infrastructure to million over the next five years to achieve it. We wantdeliver coverage for voice calls and text messages for to double the number of journeys made by bicycle andthe final O.3 - O.4 per cent of UK premises that do not will invest over £2OO million to make cycling safer, so wecurrently have it. We will ensure that Britain seizes the reduce the number of cyclists and other road users killed chance to be a world leader in the development of 5G, or injured on our roads every year. playing a key role in defining industry standards.
AN ECONOMIC PLANTOHELPYOUANDYOURFAMILY sssa:
-~ l. eoite:“: tw
Raf \j_ a\a. ‘
_7 4 We(ea
Al dd~S oté;, tmna je)
Jobs for alla.
Whatever stage of life you are at - whether you're looking for your first job out of school, or coming to the end of your career - we will work to help you enjoy the satisfaction and rewards of a decent job. We will:
m help businesses to create two million new jobs, so we achieve full employment m give businesses the most competitive taxes of any major economy m back small firms with a major business rates review m support three million new apprenticeships, so young people acquire the skills to succeed
If you want to live in the most vibrant and dynamicthe next Parliament. We will abolish long-term youth country in the world, this election matters. Only theunemployment, and make sure that all young people
Conservatives have the vision, the optimism, the ambitionare either earning or learning. And we will make our and the discipline to transform Britain. That’s because weeconomy more inclusive, by removing barriers that know that a decent job is the best weapon against povertystop women and disabled people from participating in and the best way to provide security for families. our workforce.
Britain has created moreA job is the best way to jobs than the rest of the EUprovide security for put together since 2OlOfamilies
Thanks to the success of our long-term economic plan,‘To achieve this, we will back British businesses: cutting
Britain is creating more jobs than the 27 other countriesred tape, lowering taxes on jobs and enterprise, getting of the European Union put together. That means moreyoung people into work, boosting apprenticeships people with the security of a regular pay packet. Overand investing in science and technology. With the the past five years, l.9 million new jobs have beenConservatives, Britain will be the best place in Europe created; l, OOO jobs for every single day that we haveto innovate, patent new ideas and set up and expand a been in government. business. We aim to be number one in Europe and in the top five worldwide in the World Bank’s Doing Business
This represents a transformation in many people’srankings by 2O2O and to lead Europe in attracting foreign lives; giving families more security; boosting the self-investment.
esteem of young people taken on; and providing hope for those who have been unemployed for years. Backing business also means helping our farmers and our rural communities. Neglected for l3 years under
But we need to go further. We have set out the boldLabour, we have started the process of championing and aim of achieving full employment, with the highestconnecting up the countryside. In the coming years, we employment rate of any major economy. We wantwill go further, helping our farmers, supporting British food
Britain to be the best place in the world to start aaround the world and opening up new export markets.
business and will create another two million jobs over
JOBS FOR ALLl7THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5
This is all at risk if the Labour Party forms the government. those who risk becoming so. Jobcentre Plus advisers will work
Their policies to spend more, borrow more and tax morewith schools and colleges to supplement careers advice and would be catastrophic for Britain’s businesses - and for allprovide routes into work experience and apprenticeships. But the families thrown back into the despair of joblessness andit is not fair - on taxpayers, or on young people themselves financial uncertainty.- that l82l year-olds with no work experience should slip straight into a life on benefits without first contributing to their community. So we will introduce tougher Day One
O ur p / an wi / / h e / p toWork Requirements for young people claiming outof-work.. benefits. We will replace the Jobseeker’s Allowance for l82l
& enerate J ob san d hi oh eryear-olds with a Youth Allowance that will be time-limited wa ge Ss fo reve ryb fey yto six months, after which young people will have to take an apprenticeship, a traineeship or do daily community work for their benefits. It is also not fair that taxpayers should. have to pay for l82l year-olds on Jobsecker’s Allowance to
Our p lan of action: claim Housing Benefit in order to leave home. So we will;;; ensure that they no longer have an automatic entitlement to
We will boost apprenticeships and help youHousing Benefit.
secure a good job
We will reward entrepreneurship
We have already delivered 2.2 million new apprenticeships over the last five years. Over the next five years, we will‘To support jobs, we cut Corporation Tax from 28 to 2O per deliver three million more and ensure they deliver the skillscent over the course of the Parliament, reduced National employers need. We aim to achieve full employment inInsurance bills and capped the rise in business rates. We the UK, with the highest employment rate in the G7, andhave extended lOO per cent Small Business Rate Relief we will help businesses create two million jobs over theand are providing extra support for high street shops by
Parliament. We have abolished the jobs tax - employers'increasing the business rates retail discount to £l,5OO.
National Insurance contributions (NICs) - for the under 2lsIn the next Parliament, we want to maintain the most and next year we will do the same for young apprenticescompetitive business tax regime in the G2O, and oppose under 25. We will continue to help smaller businesses takeLabour’s plans to increase Corporation Tax. We will on new workers through the Employment Allowance, which conduct a major review into business rates by the end of frees businesses from the first £2, OOO of employers’ NICs so2Ol5 to ensure that from 2Ol7 they properly reflect the that a third of employers pay no jobs tax. structure of our modern economy and provide clearer billing, better information sharing and a more efficient appeal system.
SU PP oF. OU O) ess tOWe will protect you from disruptive and keep creating l, OOO jobs a dayundemocratic strike action over the next five years
Strikes should only ever be the result of a clear, positive decision based on a ballot in which at least half the
“yy. workforce has voted. ‘This turnout threshold will be an
We will aim to abolish long-term youthimportant and fair step to rebalance the interests of unemploymentemployers, employees, the public and the rights of trade unions. We will, in addition, tackle the disproportionate
Our economic plan has helped deliver sharp falls in long-impact of strikes in essential public services by introducing term youth unemployment, taking the numbers of l6l8a tougher threshold in health, education, fire and transport.
year-olds not in education, employment or training toIndustrial action in these essential services would require historic lows. We will provide support to those l6 -l7 year-the support of at least 4O per cent of all those entitled olds still not in education, employment or training and toto take part in strike ballots - as well as a majority of
Fna fe}
The creation of the Office of ‘Tax Simplification (OTS)N
Britain has the most com petitivein 2OlO has resulted in many improvements to the UK business tax regime in the G2O -tax system. We will establish the OTS on a permanent. basis and expand its role and capacity. We will boost our and we want to keep it that Waysupport for first-time exporters and back the GREAT campaign, so we achieve our goal of having lOO, OOO more UK companies exporting in 2O2O than in 2OlO those who actually turn out to vote. We will also repealand reach our target of £l trillion in exports. And we nonsensical restrictions banning employers from hiringwill set a new, significantly higher, permanent level for agency staff to provide essential cover during strikes; andthe Annual Investment Allowance.
ensure strikes cannot be called on the basis of ballots conducted years before. We will tackle intimidation ofWe will fight for equal opportunity non-striking workers; legislate to ensure trade unions use a transparent optin process for union subscriptions; Last year alone, l4O, OOO disabled people found work. But tighten the rules around taxpayer-funded paid ‘facilitythe jobless rate for this group remains too high and, as part time’ for union representatives; and reform the role of theof our objective to achieve full employment, we will aim
Certification Officer. to halve the disability employment gap: we will transform policy, practice and public attitudes, so that hundreds of
We will cut red tape, boost start-ups and smallthousands more disabled people who can and want to be businessesin work find employment. We now have more women-led businesses than ever before, more women in work than
This Government was the first in post-war history toever before and more women on F'T'SE lOO boards than reduce the burden of regulation. We will cut a furtherever before. We want to see full, genuine gender equality.
£lO billion of red tape over the next ParliamentThe gender pay gap is the lowest on record, but we want through our Red ‘Tape Challenge and our OneIn-to reduce it further and will push business to do so: we
‘Two-Out rule. This will support our aim to makewill require companies with more than 25O employees to
Britain the best place in Europe, and one of the top fivepublish the difference between the average pay of their worldwide, to do business by 2O2O. We will also treblemale and female employees. Under Labour, women our successful Start Up Loans programme during the next Parliament so that 75, OOO entrepreneurs get theOurada imi 5s to ma k e Br ita i n chance to borrow money to set up their own business.°
We will raise the target for SMEs’ share of centralth e b est p / ace to do b USINeSS government procurement to one-third, strengtheni] n E. uro p e the Prompt Payment Code and ensure that all major government suppliers sign up. We have already helped small businesses by increasing the Annual Investmentaccounted for only one in eight FTSE lOO board members.
Allowance, reducing the burden of employment lawThey represent a quarter of board members today and we through our successful tribunal reforms and supportingwant to see this rise further in the next Parliament. We also
27, OOO new business mentors. We will go further bywant to increase the proportion of public appomtments establishing a new Small Business Conciliation servicegoing to women in the next Parliament, as well as the to mediate in disputes, especially over late payment. number of female MPs.
We will back you at work
The gender pay gap is down toa Nou that thacain. we h ow that the economy is growing strongly again, we have record low - and there are moreseen the first real-terms increase in the National Minimum women on FTSE lOO boardsWage since Labour’s Great Recession began. We strongly than ever beforesupport the National Minimum Wage and want to see further real-terms increases in the next Parliament. We
JOBSFOR ALL aNie Wr IIiesj--
*“2, ef i
Ate am,2 ‘ fa~ a7, fe} accept the recommendations of the Low Pay Commissioncomprehensive offer in place for Britain’s researchers andN that the National Minimum Wage should rise to £6.7O thisinnovators.
autumn, on course for a Minimum Wage that will be over
£8 by the end of the decade. We also support the LivingWe will support the rural economy and
Wage and will continue to encourage businesses and otherstrengthen local communities organisations to pay it whenever they can afford it. We will also take further steps to eradicate abuses of workers, suchWe have the land, the technology, and the entrepreneurial as non-payment of the Minimum Wage, exclusivity in zero-flair to enable us to make the most of the economic hours contracts and exploitation of migrant workers. potential of our rural areas. We will provide rural Britain with near universal superfast broadband by the end of
We will continue to invest in science, back ourthe next Parliament and secure the future of 3, OOO rural industrial strategies and make Britain thePost Offices. We know how important it is to preserve technology centre of Europevital community assets such as pubs, town halls and sports facilities, so we will strengthen the Community Right to
Great science is worthwhile in its own right and yieldsBid that we created. We will extend the length of time enormous practical benefits too - curing diseases, drivingcommunities have to purchase these assets, and require technological innovation, promoting business investmentowners to set a clear ‘reserve’ price for the community and informing public policy for the better. We ringto aim for when bidding. We will set up a Pub Loan fenced the science budget by making difficult choicesFund to enable community groups to obtain small loans to reduce spending in other areas. Now we will investto pay for feasibility work, lawyers’ fees, or materials for new capital on a record scale - £6.9 billion in the UK’srefurbishment, where they have bid to run the pub as part research infrastructure up to 2O2l - which will mean newof our reforms to the Community Asset Register.
equipment, new laboratories and new research institutes.
This long-term commitment includes £2.9 billion for aWe will champion our farmers and food
Grand Challenges Fund, which will allow us to invest inproducers major research facilities of national significance, such as the new Alan ‘Turing Institute, and projects such as theWe will set out a long-term vision for the future of British
Polar Research Ship and Square Kilometre Array. We havefarming, working with industry to develop a 25 year plan boosted research and development tax credits and we willto grow more, buy more and sell more British food. We will continue to support our network of University Enterpriseallow farmers to smooth their profits for tax purposes over
Zones, ensuring that Britain's world-beating universities arefive years, up from the current two years, to counter income able to make money from the technology they develop. Wevolatility. We will treble the number of apprenticeships in will support our modern industrial strategies, such as ourfood, farming and agri-tech, as part of our plan to secure successful Life Sciences strategy, to help people competethree million more apprenticeships. We will support a and win in the intense global race for high value, highscience-led approach on GM crops and pesticides and knowledge jobs. We will work with the Automotive Councilimplement our 25year strategy to eradicate bovine TB.
in support of our resurgent car industry and direct furtherWe will liberate farmers from red tape by coordinating all resources towards the Eight Great Technologies - amongvisits through a single Farm Inspection ‘Taskforce, which them robotics and nanotechnology - where Britain is set towill involve farmers themselves and use data from existing be a global leader. We have delivered a network of catapultindustry schemes, such as Red ‘Tractor. We will push for centres - R&D hubs in the technologies of the future -further reform of the EU’s Common Agricultural Policy.
and we will create more to ensure that we have a bold andWe will promote British food abroad by setting up a Great
British Food Unit to help trademark and promote local foods around the world and back British food at home,
Ine qua I ity is down from theby guaranteeing that all central government departments.. purchase food to British standards of production by the record h igh it reached underend of the Parliament. We will also help consumers to
Labourbuy British by pushing for country of origin labelling in
Europe, particularly for dairy products, following on from
JOBSFOR ALL 8d(7, 4 \ a ‘p
~-Shel~*) - 7 we BD iz ah iy,”; he 3
‘ 7a! - é2 - T?.
r' _ arérnia je) our success with beef, lamb, pork and poultry. And we willmanagement of North Sea fisheries to local communities, N champion our new Groceries Code Adjudicator, so farmersand rebalance the UK’s inland water quotas to smaller, receive a fair deal from the supermarkets. specific locally-based fishing communities.
We will support our fishing and coastalWe will support countryside pursuits communities
We will protect hunting, shooting and fishing, for all the
We will defend our hard-won Common Fisheries Policybenefits to individuals, the environment and the rural reforms, which include ending the scandalous practice ofeconomy that these activities bring. A Conservative discarding perfectly edible fish and reforming the quotaGovernment will give Parliament the opportunity to repeal system so that all atrisk species, including cod, plaice, the Hunting Act on a free vote, with a government bill in haddock and seabass, will be fished sustainably by the endgovernment time.
of the next Parliament. We will continue to devolve the
JOBSFOR ALL 288I. py ea2 i ah l, iy 7 &]
“ a zi i
‘qI e a:» s tl‘i fas}.
\Le~ 7 * 7 a4 c 44 tyli aus,- Wy a*; aii
Sa.
eey I:. Leime each
- - J - a _t.: -a‘ é;7. y'_ ‘4 Re + “r: iS oFvil* A en! z
THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5E eee2
Cutting your taxes and buildingg a fairer welfare system9 e(a)
Our commitment to you: Z
Our goal is a country that not only rewards those who work hard and do the right thing, but gives everyone - no matter their background - the chance to fulfil their potential. Achieving thisi" means seeing through our major reforms of tax and welfare. We will: is m cut income tax for 3O million people, taking everyone who earns less than £l2,5OO out of
Income Tax altogetherZ m pass a new law so that nobody working 3O hours on the Minimum Wage pays IncomeS
Tax on what they earn:
m back aspiration by raising the 4Op tax threshold - so that no one earning less than £5O, OOO fx pays it8 cap overall welfare spending, lower the amount of benefits that any household can receive to £23, OOO and continue to roll out Universal Credit, to make work payE ee°. i) m bring in tax-free childcare to support parents back into work, and give working parentsoi of 3 and 4year-olds 3O hours of free childcare a week.
Under Labour, those who worked hard found more andIncome Tax at all. We believe that cutting people’s taxes more of their earnings taken away in tax to supportis the right thing to do - not only because it is your a welfare system that allowed, and even encouraged, money, but also because cutting the taxes of the lowest people to choose benefits when they could be earning apaid and helping them stand on their own two feet is the living. This sent out terrible signals: if you did the rightmost effective poverty-tackling measure there is.
thing, you were penalised - and if you did the wrong thing, you were rewarded, with the unfairness of it allReal fairness means that where people really cannot infuriating hardworking people. work, they must be supported - but where they are able to work, they should. We have made long overdue changes to our welfare system. We have capped benefits
Weht ITax fso no household can take more in outof-work benefits
€ Nave cl: ncome tax Torthan the average household earns by going out to work.
over 26 million peop le - andWe have begun to introduce Universal Credit - a way taken over 3 million peopl e outto simplify benefits into a new single payment ~ so that work always pays. We are reassessing those on incapacity of Income Tax a Itogetherbenefits so that help goes to those who really need it.
The days of something for nothing are over - and all this has helped to reduce by 9OO, OOO the number of
Over the last five years, we have cut people’s taxespeople living in workless households.
wherever possible. We have raised the tax-free Personal
Allowance to £lO,6OO from £6,475: over 26 millionIn the next Parliament, we will continue to reward hard people are now keeping more of their hard-earnedwork: raising the tax-free Personal Allowance so that money and 3 million of the lowest paid are paying nothose working 3O hours on the Minimum Wage pay
CUTTING YOUR TAXES, MAKING WELFARE FAIRER AND CONTROLLING IMMIGRATION25: i I '- lie >.
) » _ ee_ {> -Cc? ta!
co ---s
£4,-.. a a» Le ae ‘ n dees (
Waray ‘a’ mV) mA LAs Io> ee Oe ja i_- ~_wo ' Lak-\
Z ' < aNfi } i fii j LA. ZZ ey F‘ee wy
$--FAy I eo * / 2,--<--ae: oe Se 4 re y SS]IESA ys Wy, (. p/ A a LSSSz
THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5F
We will back your ambition
The goal of welfare reformY2 should be to reward hardThe 4Op tax rate was only supposed to be paid by the5 best-off people in our country. But in the past couple of5 wor k an d p rotect th edecades, far too many have been dragged into it., oO vu / nerd b / eWe have already announced an above-inflation increase2 in the threshold next year. Now we will raise the 4Opcx tax threshold much further, so that no one earning less no Income ‘Tax at all and taking hardworking peoplethan £5O, OOO pays the higher rate of Income Tax. The7 out of a 4Op higher rate tax band originally meant to8OO, OOO people earning between £42,385 and £5O, OOO< capture only the wealthy. And we will see through ourwill no longer pay the 4Op rate of tax. im welfare reforms, lowering the benefit cap and rolling out
Universal Credit, to make the system fairer and rewardWe will support you as you raise your familyS hard work. mS
We will support you, whether you choose to go out tovj. work or stay at home to raise your children. We willa
Our p lan of action: back the institution of marriage in our society, enablingz married couples to transfer £l, O6O of their tax-free8
We will reward workincome to their husband or wife, where the highest earner© is a basic rate taxpayer. This applies to civil partnerships
A Conservative Government will not increase the ratestoo, and the transferable amount will always rise at least of VAT) Income Tax or National Insurance in the nextin line with the Personal Alowance. And we will helpom
Parliament. Instead, we will ease the burden of taxationfamilies stay together and handle the stresses of modern by raising the tax-free Personal Allowance - the amountlife by continuing to invest at least £7.5 million a year in you can earn before you start paying tax - to £l2,5OO. relationship support.
This will cut Income ‘Tax for 3O million people and take everyone who earns less than £l2,5OO out of IncomeWe will bring in tax-free childcare to help
‘Tax altogether. That means by the end of the decade, parents return to work, and give working one million more people on the lowest wages will beparents of three and four year-olds 3O hours lifted out of Income ‘Tax, and people who work for 3Oof free childcare a week hours a week on the increased National Minimum Wage will no longer pay any Income ‘Tax at all. We will passWe have already legislated to introduce tax-free a new law so that the Personal Allowance automaticallychildcare in the next Parliament - worth up to £2, OOO rises in line with the National Minimum Wage. Theper child per year - to help parents who want to work.
new Tax Free Minimum Wage law will be applied fromWe introduced l5 hours a week of free childcare for all the first Budget after the General Election. ‘The changethree and four-year olds and the most deprived twowill update the l977 'Rooker-Wise' amendment whichyear-olds. And because working families with children forced governments to uprate tax thresholds in line withunder school age face particularly high childcare costs, inflation, meaning the Personal Allowance will nowin the next Parliament we will give families where all increase more quickly. parents are working an entitlement to 3O hours of free childcare for their three and four year-olds.
We will cap the UK's overall welfare spending, to save you money
We will cut Income Tax for 3O raaliliteta' peopl e -so that hardWe will keep a check on the growth of welfare spending,: enabling us to provide a system that is fair to those who work is a lways rewardedneed it, and fair to those who pay for it too. Our overall welfare cap will limit the amount that government
CUTTING YOUR TAXES, MAKING WELFARE FAIRERAND CONTROLLINGIMMIGRATION 27THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5
°°in children’s lives, by recognising the root causes of
A welf are SY. stem that Is f alrpoverty: entrenched worklessness family breakdown, to th ose who need / t, a nd fa i [ problem debt, and drug and alcohol dependency.
to those who pay f or it too. We will reduce the household benefit cap to stopping benefit cheats and _ make the system fairer en di ng wel fe are ab U SéWe will lower the maximum amount that a single household can claim in benefits each year from can spend on certain social security benefits in the five£26, OOO to £23, OOO, so we reward work. We will years from 2Ol5l6. We will freeze working age benefitscontinue to have exemptions from the cap for those for two years from April 2Ol6, with exemptions forreceiving Disability Living Allowance or the Personal disability and pensioner benefits - as at present - asIndependence Payment.
well as maternity allowance, statutory maternity pay, statutory paternity pay, statutory adoption pay andWe will help you back into work if you have a statutory sick pay. We will deliver Universal Credit, long-term yet treatable condition in order to provide the right incentives for people to work; target support at those who need it most; reduceWe will make sure the hardest to help receive the support fraud and error; and streamline administration of thethey need for a fulfilling life. We will review how best welfare system. We will work to eliminate child povertyto support those suffering from long-term yet treatable and introduce better measures to drive real changeconditions, such as drug or alcohol addiction, or obesity, back into work. People who might benefit from treatment should get the medical help they need so they can return
We will lower the benefit ca pto work. If they refuse a recommended treatment, we will from £26, OOO to £23, OOO tomies whether their benefits should be reduced. We will so provide significant new support for mental health, reward workbenefiting thousands of people claiming outof-work benefits or being supported by Fit for Work.
Sez
THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5E
Controlled immigration that benefits Britaing sss iitS
Our commitment to you:6
Our plan to control immigration will put you, your family and the British people first. We willz reduce the number of people coming to our country with tough new welfare conditions andi robust enforcement. We will: x m keep our ambition of delivering annual net migration in the tens of thousands, not the< hundreds of thousandsrm control migration from the European Union, by reforming welfare rulesZ clamp down on illegal immigration and abuse of the Minimum WagemS m enhance our border security and strengthen the enforcement of immigration rules:
m develop a fund to ease pressure on local areas and public services.& es -
Conservatives believe in controlled immigration, notcolleges of their rights to sponsor foreign students; F mass immigration. Immigration brings real benefits toinstalled proper exit checks at our borders; cracked
Britain - to our economy, our culture and our nationaldown on illegal working and sham marriages; madeom life. We will always be a party that is open, outwardit harder for people to live in the UK illegally, by looking and welcoming to people from all aroundrestricting their access to bank accounts, driving licences the world. We also know that immigration must beand private housing; and reduced the number of controlled. When immigration is out of control, it putsappeal routes to stop people clogging up our courts with pressure on schools, hospitals and transport; and it canspurious attempts to remain in the country. All of this cause social pressures if communities find it hard tohas made a difference. Immigration from outside the integrate. EU has come down since 2OlO.
We must work to controlNonEU migration cut by l3 per immigration and putFon aoe do the eu ome "he°rom outside tneCappe
Britain firstPP
Between l997 and 2OO9, under the last LabourWe have seen many more people from the EU coming
Government, we had the largest influx of people Britainto Britain than originally anticipated, principally had ever seen. ‘Their open borders policy, combinedbecause our economy has been growing so much more with their failure to reform welfare, meant that forrapidly and creating more jobs than other EU countries.
years over 9O percent of employment growth in thisAs a result, our action has not been enough to cut country was accounted for by foreign nationals - evenannual net migration to the tens of thousands. ‘That though there were l.4 million people who spent mostambition remains the right one. But it is clearly going to of the 2OOOs living on outof-work benefits. For the pasttake more time, more work and more difficult long-term five years, we have been working to turn around thedecisions to achieve. Continuing this vital work will be situation we inherited. our priority over the next five years.
Since 2OlO, we have stripped more than 85O bogusWe will negotiate new rules with the EU, so that people
CUTTING YOUR TAXES, MAKING WELFARE FAIRER AND CONTROLLING IMMIGRATION29THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5 will have to be earning here for a number of yearsWe will tackle criminality and abuse of free before they can claim benefits, including the tax creditsmovement that top up low wages. Instead of something-fornothing, we will build a system based on the principleWe will negotiate with the EU to introduce stronger of something-for-something. We will then put thesepowers to deport criminals and stop them coming back, changes to the British people in a straight inoutand tougher and longer reentry bans for all those who referendum on our membership of the European Unionabuse free movement. We want to toughen requirements by the end of 2Ol7. At the same time, we will continuefor nonEU spouses to join EU citizens, including with to strengthen our borders, improve the enforcement ofan income threshold and English language test. And our immigration laws and act to make sure people leavewhen new countries are admitted to the EU in future, at the end of their visas. Across the spectrum, from thewe will insist that free movement cannot apply to those student route to the family and work routes, we willnew members until their economies have converged build a system that truly puts you, your family and themuch more closely with existing Member States.
British people first.
We will continue to cut immigration from. outside the EU
We have already capped the level of skilled economic
We will regain control of EU migration bymigration from outside the EU. We will maintain our reforming welfare rulescap at 2O,7OO during the next Parliament. This will ensure that we only grant visas to those who have the
Changes to welfare to cut EU migration will be anskills we really need in our economy. We will reform the absolute requirement in the renegotiation. We havestudent visa system with new measures to tackle abuse already banned housing benefit for EU jobseekers, andand reduce the numbers of students overstaying once restricted other benefits, including Jobseeker's Allowance. their visas expire. Our action will include clamping
We will insist that EU migrants who want to claim taxdown on the number of socalled ‘satellite campuses’ credits and child benefit must live here and contributeopened in London by universities located elsewhere to our country for a minimum of four years. ‘This willin the UK, and reviewing the highly trusted sponsor reduce the financial incentive for lower-paid, lower-system for student visas. And as the introduction of exit skilled workers to come to Britain. We will introduce achecks will allow us to place more responsibility on visa new residency requirement for social housing, so that EUsponsors for migrants who overstay, we will introduce migrants cannot even be considered for a council housetargeted sanctions for those colleges or businesses that unless they have been living in an area for at least fourfail to ensure that migrants comply with the terms of years. If an EU migrant’s child is living abroad, thentheir visa.
they should receive no child benefit or child tax credit, no matter how long they have worked in the UK andWe will strengthen the enforcement of no matter how much tax they have paid. ‘To reduce theimmigration rules numbers of EU migrants coming to Britain, we will end the ability of EU jobseekers to claim any job-seekingWe have introduced a ‘deport first, appeal later’ rule benefits at all. And if jobseekers have not found a jobfor foreign national offenders. We will now remove within six months, they will be required to leave. even more illegal immigrants by extending this rule to all immigration appeals and judicial reviews, including where a socalled right to family life is involved, apart from asylum claims. We will also implement a new removals strategy to take away opportunities for spurious: legal challenge and opportunities to abscond. We will
To ugh er tests for m gra ntsre satelite macking for every foreign national before th ey can claim benefitsoffender subject to an outstanding deportation order or deportation proceedings. And we will implement the
Syz
THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5F requirement for all landlords to check the immigrationa new Controlling Migration Fund to ease pressures9 status of their tenants. on services and to pay for additional immigration enforcement. ‘To prevent sectors becoming partially or°
We will tackle people trafficking and exploitation wholly reliant on foreign workers, we will require those2 regularly utilising the Shortage Occupation List, underw)
We have already reintroduced a proper system of exitwhich they can bring skilled foreign workers into theS checks across the country, passed a Modern SlaveryUK, to provide long-term plans for training Britishoe
Act that will protect people from exploitation, andworkers. o quadrupled the fines for unscrupulous employers who7 undercut the Minimum Wage. Now we will introduce< tougher labour market regulation to tackle illegal"ityi working and exploitation. ‘To crack down further onWe will p rotect British values illegal working, we will harness data from multiplean d our way O if I / if eS agencies, including Exit Checks data, to identify illegalmS immigrants and businesses that employ illegal workers. vj
And to meenUNIse tougher action on employers who cloWe will promote integration and British values2 not pay the minimum wage, we will allow inspectione teams to reinvest more of the money raised by finesBeing able to speak English is a fundamental part of5 levied on employers. integrating into our society. We have introduced tough.
new language tests for migrants and ensured councils<
We will ease pressure on public services andreduce spending on translation services. Next, we5 your local commun itywill legislate to ensure that every public sector worker“ operating in a customer-facing role must speak fluent
We are taking unprecedented action to tackle healthEnglish. And to encourage better integration into our tourism and will recover up to £5OO million fromsociety, we will also require those coming to Britain on migrants who use the NHS by the middle of the nexta family visa with only basic English to become more
Parliament. To help communities experiencing high andfluent over time, with new language tests for those unexpected volumes of immigration, we will introduceseeking a visa extension.
CUTTING YOUR TAXES, MAKING WELFARE FAIRERAND CONTROLLING IMMIGRATION 34oaee a -" v Po> -i i\- ai
/teirf ra. AY wig,-.‘ S-. sa aes fFs _. as ' f” i ‘ ae f ey, yA‘- vu om iYi oa? es ae f Ii i, a. ABees:
y")
Nid:
\ i - \.2
Giving your child the best start in lifeZ
OO5
>. ac
Ca)
Your child deserves the best start in life. A good education is not a luxury; it should bea right for F& everyone. We will: fe) m ensure a good primary school place for your child, with zero tolerance for failuregS turn every failing and coasting secondary school into an academy and deliver freea schools for parents and communities that want themfe) we) m help teachers to make Britain the best country in the world for developing maths, ds engineering, science and computing skillsut lui m create 3 million new apprenticeships and make sure there is no cap on university places, so we have aspiration for all. v
We know what works in education: great teachers; There are over 25O new free schools - set up and run by brilliant leadership; rigour in the curriculum; disciplinelocal people - delivering better education for the children in the classroom; proper exams. We have been bold inwho need it most. We have boosted the number of reforming the education system to deliver these things, apprenticeships to record levels - 2.2 million over the last based upon simple, clear principles and values. Wefive years - and last September more people headed off to believe that parents and teachers should be empowereduniversity than at any time in history. ‘Too many children, to run their schools independently. We believe thathowever, are still not receiving the excellent education that teaching is a highly skilled profession, and that we needthey deserve. So we will continue our reforms, so that every to attract the best graduates into it. And we believe thatchild has the best possible start in life.
there is no substitute for a rigorous academic curriculum to secure the best from every pupil.
There are a million more pupils
We inherited a system where far too many children leftin schools rated by Ofsted as school without the qualifications and skills they needed.;;;.
One in three children was leaving primary school unablegoo d’ or ‘outstandi ng to read, write and add up properly. The number of pupils studying the core academic subjects at GCSE had halved.
Our schools had fallen down the global league tables.
for maths and science. And the poorest children wereOur p lan of action:
attending the weakest schools.;;;;
We will drive up standards in your child’s school
Our far-reaching education reforms have changed this. We have brought high standards back to teaching, disciplineWe have made exams more rigorous and ended grade back to schools, and challenging subjects back onto theinflation. ‘There is more to do. We will start by introducing curriculum. Today, there are a milion more pupils intough new standards for literacy and numeracy in primary schools rated by Ofsted as ‘good’ or ‘outstanding’. Overschools. We will expect every llyear-old to know their a thousand schools that were ranked ‘inadequate’ havetimes tables off by heart and be able to perform long become Academies, bringing in new leadership to promotedivision and complex multiplication. ‘They should be discipline, rigour and higher standards. able to read a book and write a short story with accurate punctuation, spelling and grammar. If children do not
THE BEST SCHOOLS AND HOSPITALS FOR YOU AND YOUR FAMILY33THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5 reach the required standards in their exams at the endWe will continue to protect school funding of primary school, they will resit them at the start of secondary school, to make sure no pupil is left behind. Over the last five years, we have protected the schools budget
We will require secondary school pupils to take GCSEsand committed £l8 billion for new school buildings, so in English, maths, science, a language and history orthat children can learn in the best environment possible.
geography, with Ofsted unable to award its highest ratingsUnder a future Conservative Government, the amount of to schools that refuse to teach these core subjects. money following your child into school will be protected.
As the number of pupils increases, so will the amount of
We will ensure there is a good primary schoolmoney in our schools. On current pupil number forecasts, place for your child, with zero tolerance of failurethere will be a real-terms increase in the schools budget in the next Parliament. We will continue to provide the pupil
We have more than doubled Labour’s spending on newpremium, protected at current rates, so that schools receive school places. But we want to go even further, investingadditional money for those from the poorest backgrounds.
at least £7 billion over the next Parliament to provideWe will support families by providing free meals to all good school places. And we will let our best headteachersinfants. And we will make schools funding fairer. We have take control of failing primary schools, by expanding thealready increased funding for the 69 least well-funded local
National Leaders of Education programme. authorities in the country, and will make this the baseline for their funding in the next Parliament. We will not allow state. schools to make a profit.
Every school needs high standa rds, proper fundin igWe will back your child's teachers an d accounta biI tyWe have already given teachers greater disciplinary powers.
In the next Parliament, we will expect every teacher to be.+p:. trained not just in how to tackle serious behaviour issues,
We will turn every failing and coasting secondary;; er.. but also in how to deal with the low level disruption that school into an academy, and deliver free schools;;.;;; stops children from learning properly. This generation of if parents in your area want themteachers is already the best-qualified ever. In future, we will recruit and keep the best teachers by reducing the time they
Over 4, OOO schools are already benefiting from academyspend on paperwork, introducing bursaries for the most status, giving them more power over discipline andin-demand subjects, paying good teachers more, further budgets. And nearly 8OO of the worst-performingreducing the burden of Ofsted inspections and continuing primary schools have been taken over by experiencedto encourage the growth of ‘Teach First. We will increase academy sponsors with a proven track record of success. the number of teachers able to teach Mandarin in schools
This is improving education for our children. So wein England, so we can compete in the global race. We want will continue to expand academies, free schools, studioteachers to be regarded in the same way as other highly schools and University Technical Colleges. Over theskilled professionals, so we are supporting the creation next Parliament, we will open at least 5OO new freeof an independent College of ‘Teaching to promote the schools, resulting in 27O, OOO new school places. Andhighest standards of teaching and school leadership.
we will introduce new powers to force coasting schools to accept new leadership. Any school judged by OfstedWe will lead the world in maths and science to be requiring improvement will be taken over by the best headteachers - backed by expert sponsorsWe have increased the time schools will spend on maths, or high-performing neighbouring schools - unless itand ensured that children learn to code as soon as they can demonstrate that it has a plan to improve rapidly. start school. Maths is now the most popular Alevel subject.
We will continue to allow all good schools to expand, We aim to make Britain the best place in the world to study whether they are maintained schools, academies, freemaths, science and engineering, measured by improved schools or grammar schools. performance in the PISA league tables. ‘To help achieve this, we will train an extra l7,5OO maths and physics
Bpa
University ‘Technical College within reach of every city. We
Schools bud get protecte d withwill abolish employers’ National Insurance contributions<
£5 billion give n to tackleon earnings up to the upper earnings limit for apprentices9 qiwoeunder the age of 25. And we will roll out many moreo
Labour's school places crisisDae_ ie egree Apprenticeships, allowing young people to combineYn a world-class degree with a world-class apprenticeship.< teachers over the next five years. We will make sure that all students are pushed to achieve their potential and createWe will improve Further Education2 more opportunities to stretch the most able.9
We will continue to improve Further Education through>.
We will protect childrenour network of National Colleges, which will provide9 specialist higher-level vocational training in sectors critical&
Every child deserves a warm, loving home, and to feel safeto economic growth. We will publish more earnings andnl online and at school. We have made improving supportdestination data for Further Education courses, and requireui for children and young people with special educationalmore accreditation of courses by employers.
needs and disabilities a priority. We have created 2,2OOmore special schools places through our free schoolsWe will ensure that if you want to go to university, programme, introduced a coordinated assessment processyou can to determine a child or young person’s needs, and funded degree-level specialist training for teachers and supportThis year, for the first time, over half a million people staff. And to make sure it’s working, Ofsted now formallyhave been admitted to our universities, including a record inspects local areas for their effectiveness in fulfilling theirproportion of students from disadvantaged backgrounds.
new duties. We have made progress in reforming ourFrom September, we will go even further, abolishing the adoption system, but there is more to do. We will introducecap on higher education student numbers and removing regional adoption agencies, working across local authorityan arbitrary ceiling on ambition. Our reforms to university boundaries to match children with the best parents forfunding mean you do not have to pay anything towards them. We will continue to raise the quality of children’stuition while studying, and only start paying back if you earn social work, by expanding training programmes, such asover £2l, OOO per year. We will ensure the continuing success
Frontline, and creating new opportunities to develop theand stability of these reforms, so that the interests of both next generation of leaders in the field. We will continue tostudents and taxpayers are fairly represented. We will also tackle all forms of bullying in our schools. And we will stopintroduce a national postgraduate loan system for taught children's exposure to harmful sexualised content online, by masters and PhD courses. We will ensure that universities requiring age verification for access to all sites contamingdeliver the best possible value for money to students: we pornographic material and age-rating for all music videos. will introduce a framework to recognise universities offering the highest teaching quality; encourage universities to
We will improve skills trainingoffer more two-year courses; and require more data to be openly available to potential students so that they can make
We have given employers much more control overdecisions informed by the career paths of past graduates.
apprenticeship courses, so they teach skills relevant to the workplace. We will continue to replace lower-level, We will ensure that our universities remain classroom-based Further Education courses with high-world-leading quality apprenticeships that combine training with experience of work and a wage. We will ensure there is aWe will maintain our untversities’ reputation for world-class research and academic excellence. ‘Through the Nurse::: Review of research councils, we will seek to ensure that the
Child PRS rty ie down - with. UK continues to support world-leading science, and invests
3OO, OOO fewer children livi ng tnpublic money in the best possible way. And we will encourage pove rtythe development of online education as a tool for students, whether studying independently or in our universities.
THE BEST SCHOOLS AND HOSPITALS FORYOUANDYOURFAMILY 35Cx
<5 I: J /a eeea
Protecting and improving our2 eeD
National Health Serviceg s-“ié*i@iG ea)
Our National Health Service must be there for you throughout your life. We will: z continue to increase spending on the NHS, supported by a strong economy, so the NHSz
Ca) stays free for you to use5 ie) m spend at least an additional £8 billion by 2O2O over and above inflation to fund andSs
°. Nn support the NHS’s own action plan for the next five yearsi m ensure you can see a GP and receive the hospital care you need, 7 days a week by 2O2O, with [im a guarantee that everyone over 75 will get a same-day appointment if they need oneF integrate health and social care, through our Better Care Fund m lead the world in fighting cancer and finding a cure for dementia
The NHS is vitally important to all of us. Founded onWe are putting things right. We protected the NHS budget.
the principle that no one should ever have to worry aboutOur doctors and nurses are now doing over a million their ability to pay for their healthcare, it is a profoundmore operations each year than in 2OlO. Our Cancer expression of our values as a nation. Drugs Fund has given more than 6O, OOO people access to life-saving drugs. We have doubled funding for dementia
Patients, doctors and nurses are the experts on howresearch. Hospital infections have halved. An independent to improve people’s health. So we have given greaterthink tank, the Commonwealth Fund, has found that power and accountability to the frontline than any otherunder the Conservatives the NHS has become the best government. We cleared out bureaucracy, generatinghealthcare system of any major country. And patients are savings which we have invested in care for patients. reporting the highest levels of satisfaction for years. ‘The
Instead of chasing managerial targets, we have focused onNHS is performing well in the face of increasing demand, outcomes and performance. And we have given patientswith fewer patients waiting longer than the l8, 26 and more power by providing them with more information.52 week targets than in May 2OlO. We have slashed the number of people who wait over a year for the treatment
Under Labour, micro-management from Whitehallthey need, from over l8, OOO to under 5OO.
cloggedup the system. A coverup culture developed, where doctors and nurses were scared to speak out aboutDespite this progress, our NHS faces major challenges.
the appalling standards of care at hospitals in places suchAn ageing population will place more pressure on health as Stafford and Morecambe Bay. By the time Labour leftand social care, and life-saving but expensive new drugs office, our cancer survival rates lagged far behind those ofwill push up costs. And for years it’s been too hard to other countries, and more than l8, OOO patients had beenaccess the NHS out of hours, even though sudden illness waiting for over a year to start their treatment. and events which you and your family cannot plan for do not respect normal working hours. We will rise to these challenges. By building a strong economy, we will be able
We are build In 4 an N HS that ISto increase spending in real terms every year. With a future oe°Conservative Government, you will have a truly 7day more eff icien t more effectiveNHS, at the frontier of science, offering you new drugs and and more accountda. ' letreatments, safeguarded for years to come.
THE BEST SCHOOLS AND HOSPITALS FOR YOU AND YOUR FAMILY37THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5
We have increased the NHS
We will deliver a strong NHS through a strongbudget above inflation every year economy
We are set to increase health spending by more than £7that the NHS is accountable when mistakes are made, and billion above and beyond inflation in the five years sinceimplement the recommendations of the independent review
2OlO. And we will continue spend more on the NHS, ininto the Stafford Hospital scandal. We will ensure that the real terms, every year. The NHS is more efficient nowindependent Care Quality Commission rates all hospitals, than it has ever been. We will implement the NHS’s owncare homes and GP surgeries. We introduced expert Chief plan to improve health care even further - the Five YearInspectors to promote excellence and root out poor care, and
Forward View. Because of our long-term economic plan, we will continue to back them. We are deeply proud of our we are able to commit to increasing NHS spending inNHS staff, who are the best in the world. Over the last five
England in real terms by a minimum of £8 billion overyears, we have hired thousands more doctors and nurses. We the next five years. Combined with the efficiencies that thewill continue to ensure that we have enough doctors, nurses
NHS Forward View sets out, this will provide the fundingand other staff to meet patients’ needs, and consider how necessary to implement this plan in full. best to recognise and reward high performance.
We will help you make informed choices about
We are prioritising resourcesyour healthcare to frontline services - with 9,9OOWe will improve standards in all areas of care. In 2Ol3 more doctors and 6,9OO morewe introduced the friends and family test so you could nursesprovide feedback on the care and treatment you received; we aim to increase the proportion of people who rate their experience as ‘excellent’ or ‘very good’. We will boost.. transparency even further, ensuring you can access full
We will make the NHS more convenientinformation about the safety record of your hospital and for youother NHS or independent providers, and give patients greater choice over where and how they receive care. We
We want England to be the first nation in the world towill give you full access to your own electronic health provide a truly 7 day NHS. Already millions more peoplerecords, while retaining your right to opt-out of your can see a GP 7 days a week, from 8am-8pm, but by 2O2O werecords being shared electronically.
want this for everyone. We will now go further, with hospitals properly staffed, so that the quality of care is the sameWe will support you and your family to stay every day of the week. We will restore your right to access ahealthy specific, named GP - something that Labour abolished. We will ensure that your family doctor appomtments and repeatWe are helping people to stay healthy by ending the open prescriptions are routinely available online, wherever youdisplay of tobacco in shops, introducing plain-packaged live. And we will guarantee same-day GP appointments forcigarettes and funding local authority public health budgets.
all over 75s who need them. We will take action to reduce childhood obesity and continue to promote clear food information. We will support people
We will offer you the safest and moststruggling with addictions and undertake a review into how compassionate care in the world
We will ensure that English hospitals and GP surgeriesP eo P / e d eserve are the safest in the world, places where you are treatedp at j ent-centre d h ea It h care with dignity and respect. We will continue to eliminate mixed-sex wards and hospital infections. We will ensurenot more b ureaqucrd cy
38a best to support those suffermeg from long-term yet treatabledecoding lOO, OOO whole genomes. ‘This will help scientists conditions, such as drug or alcohol addiction, or obesity, and doctors understand diseases better, and design more< back in to work. We will be the first country to implement aeffective, personalised treatments.9 national, evidence-based diabetes prevention programme.5
And we will invest more in primary care, to help preventWe will continue to take your mental health asu health problems before they start. seriously as your physical health<< ea)
We will ensure you receive the best healthcareWe have legislated to ensure that mental and physical2 health conditions are given equal priority. We will now
We will speed up your access to new medicines bygo further, ensuring that there are therapists in every> implementing the findings of our Innovative Medicinespart of the country providing treatment for those who9 and Medical Technology Review. We will increase theneed it. We are increasing funding for mental health& use of cost-effective new medicines and technologies, andcare. We will enforce the new access and waiting timenl encourage large-scale trials of innovative technologies andstandards for people experiencing mental ill-health, ui health services. Antibiotic resistance is a major health riskincluding children and young people. Building on our so we will continue to lead the global fight against it, takingsuccess in training thousands of nurses and midwivesforward the recommendations of the independent reviewto become health visitors, we will ensure that women launched by the Prime Minister, David Cameron. Andhave access to mental health support during and after we will support our long-term economic plan by fosteringpregnancy, while strengthening the health visiting research, innovation and jobs in the life science industry. programme for new mothers.
We will help if you or your loved ones areWe will ensure that people can grow old in affected by cancercomfort and dignity
Cancer survival rates are improving, and are now the bestWe have led the world on fighting dementia, and will they have ever been. We will continue to invest in our life-deliver our strategy - the Prime Minister’s Challenge on saving Cancer Drugs Fund. We will work with the NHS, Dementia 2O2O - making sure that everyone diagnosed charities and patient groups to deliver the new strategywith the condition gets a meaningful care plan to support recommended by NHS England’s cancer taskforce. them and their family. We will increase support for fullThis will improve survival rates and save thousands oftime unpaid carers. We will guarantee that you will not lives through enhanced prevention, earlier detectionhave to sell your home to fund your residential social care.
and diagnosis, and better treatment and care. We will‘Too many people spend their last days in hospital when continue to support research to improve the diagnosis andthey would prefer to die closer to home; we will support treatment of rare diseases and cancers, including throughcommissioners to combine better health and social care services for the terminally ill so that more people are able to die in a place of their choice. We will continue to integrate
Over 6O, OOO peopl e havethe health and social care systems, joiningup services benefited from the Cancerbetween homes, clinics and hospitals, including through piloting new approaches like the pooling of around
Drugs Fun d£6 billion of health and social care funding in Greater
Manchester and the £5.3 billion Better Gare Fund.
THE BEST SCHOOLS AND HOSPITALS FORYOUANDYOURFAMILY 39Yi Se SANaZ_
-7 My l Ai t!'Nl ch ie HW)
AN Wie ey I): a eeea
Enabling you to enjoy our heritage, Z e eD creativity and sportsS ea)
Wherever you live in the country, we want you to be able to enjoy the best our culture andz sports have to offer. We will: Z
°°°Ca) m keep our major national museums and galleries free to enterrs) ie) m support school sport, build on our Olympic and Paralympic legacy, and deliver the RugbyG and Cricket World Cups and the World Athletics Championshipsi m freeze the BBC licence fee, to save you moneyiy m support our creative industries and defend a free mediaOne of the highlights of the past five years was theOur pla n of action:
London Olympic and Paralympic Games. ‘Those weeks in 2Ol2 demonstrated the best of our country. When theWe will support our world-leading museums, pressure is on, we deliver; when the stakes are high, wegalleries and heritage come together; when it comes to taking on the world, we can win. We will keep our major national museums and galleries free to enter and enable our cultural institutions to benefit
We may not be the biggest country, but our museumsfrom greater financial autonomy to use their budgets as are second to none. In music, art, fashion, theatre, they see fit. Over the last five years, we have made sure that design, film, television and the performing arts, wearts funding benefits the whole of the UK. We will support have an edge. Conservatives understand these thingsa Great Exhibition in the North; back plans for a new do not just enhance our national prestige and boosttheatre, ‘The Factory, Manchester; and help the Manchester our economy; they help tie our country together, Museum, in partnership with the British Museum, to strengthening the bonds between all of us. establish a new India Gallery. We are also supporting plans to develop a modern world class concert hall for London.
That’s why, despite all the economic chaos we inherited, We will ensure the protection and enjoyment of one we have put over £8 billion of public and Lotteryour most ancient and precious heritage sites by building funding into the arts, heritage, museums and galleriesa tunnel where the A3O3 passes closest to Stonehenge.
during the last five years. We have also boosted schoolWe significantly increased National Lottery funding for sports and increased the share of National Lotteryheritage and have created a brand new heritage charity - funding going to good causes. English Heritage - to support more than 4OO buildings and monuments. And we will continue to support essential roof repairs for our cathedrals and churches, along with other places of worship.
Culture and sport helpaa
IWe will continue to support local libraries bring us closer together as
°°We will help public libraries to support local a nation, streng then& thecommunities by providing free wifi. And we will assist bo n ds between a / / o} Usthem in embracing the digital age by working with them
THE BEST SCHOOLS AND HOSPITALS FOR YOU AND YOUR FAMILY4lTHE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5 to ensure remote access to ebooks, without chargeamounts of illegal content, including their proxies. And and with appropriate compensation for authors thatwe will build on progress made under our voluntary enhances the Public Lending Right scheme. anti-piracy projects to warn internet users when they are breaching copyright. We will work to ensure that search
We will support our mediaengines do not link to the worst-offending sites.
A free media is the bedrock of an open society. WeWe will continue to support tourism will deliver a comprehensive review of the BBC Royalin our country
Charter, ensuring it delivers value for money for the licence fee payer, while maintaining a world class serviceOur tourism industry already supports three million jobs and supporting our creative industries. ‘That is whyand is one of the nation’s leading employers and export we froze the BBC licence fee and will keep it frozen, earners. We will set challenging targets for Visit Britain pending Charter renewal. And we will continue to ‘top-and Visit England to ensure more visitors travel outside slice’ the licence fee for digital infrastructure to supportthe capital. We will simplify and speed up visa issuance superfast broadband across the country. for tourists. And because tourism is an industry that depends more than most on young people, we will step
We will defend press freedomup efforts to recruit more apprentices into the business.
We will continue to defend hard-won liberties and theWe will build on our Olympic and operation of a free press. But alongside the media’sParalympic legacy rights comes a clear responsibility, which is why we set up the public, judge-led Leveson Inquiry in responseWe want our sportsmen and women to win even more to the phone-hacking scandal, created a new watchdogmedals in Rio 2Ol6 than they did in London 2Ol2. So by Royal Charter and legislated to toughen media libelwe will continue to support elite sports funding as part laws. Because the work of the free press is so importantof our Olympic and Paralympic legacy. We will deliver we will offer explicit protection for the role of journaliststhe Rugby World Cup in 2Ol5, the World Athletics via the British Bill of Rights and we will ban the policeChampionship in 2Ol7, IPC World Championships in from accessing journalists’ phone records to identify2Ol7 and the Cricket World Cup in 2Ol9, maximising whistle-blowers and other sources without prior judicialthe opportunities for tourism and jobs. We will support approval. Local newspapers are an important source ofnew sports in the UK, in particular through greater links information for local communities and a vital part of awith the US National Football League, the National healthy democracy. To support them as they adapt toBasketball Association and Major League Baseball, with new technology and changing circumstances, we willthe ultmate ambition of new franchises being based here.
consult on the introduction of a business rates relief for local newspapers in England. We will boost sport in your community
We will support our creative industriesWe have already boosted funding for sport in primary schools and over l8, OOO schools have registered to
The creative industries have become our fastest-growingtake part in our School Games. We will go further, economic sector, contributing nearly £77 billion to thesupporting primary school sport with £l5O million a
UK economy ~ driven in part by the tax incentives foryear, paid directly to head-teachers, until 2O2O. This will films, theatre, video games, animation and orchestrasmake sure that all primary schoolchildren benefit from we introduced. Our support for the film industry has resulted in great British films and encouraged
Hollywood’s finest to flock to the UK. We will continueSchool Games su ppo rted with these reliefs, with a tax credit for children’s televisionover £l5O million of National next year, and expand them when possible. We will.
protect intellectual property by continuing to requireLotte ry an d pu blic mon ey internet service providers to block sites that carry large a minimum of two hours high-class sport and PE each....@ week. We will improve the quality of Community Sports facilities, working with local authorities, the Football9
Association and the Premier League to fund investment5 in artificial football pitches in more than 3O cities acrossu
England. We will continue to invest in participation< and physical activity, recognising sport’s vital benefitson to health and to NHS England’s campaign to prevent2 diabetes. We will lift the number of women on national sports governing bodies to at least 25 per cent by 2Ol7, a and seek to increase participation in sport by womena and girls. Oo
Ca) lui
THE BEST SCHOOLS AND HOSPITALS FOR YOU AND YOUR FAMILY43ivF, i j,
ASJ, Pe Le
Lj 7i}
_. a. iPy 'ir on
--na: a ‘ae aJere Cane) A i
¥ete aa se, 7offan tet ie ot c ered Beat ee “Cce inl ana I aie Af aaa aaai¢ ee, oy
Jmae seth ae eS Bae we ticcgate 2 aaa detse i er oe oe ea a ee4aches I
Lae Re RS Nag ees Ee Re a pa I Pe et Se Ggds oe ae “* a a
ERR Cn Ora cet, aeembers pita. et qa ¥ gent
Fe tle gd Serene ae ae eee fia in we act nee ee 4 “ates a a ery vi Met Ph it eit Tes!
iScere atte) 8 Gar si “cave radi I en ae ie a oe Soyal (Pe e. rata 5\rete. Tee eSrT we
Far pr hyhtehhts J
-An Ts “ -& ge pe‘tte
W»il ‘t in,
-it
I“hel avel
Ld. vw- ie wal: at\:7 oe.:-as
--I“ ’
Piatsad aLa Ver. sala
°°°°5
Helping you build the Big SocietyZ
Building the Big Society is about involving the people, neighbourhoods, villages, towns and cities of Britain in the great task of improving our country - and giving young people the power andO opportunity to play a real part in their community. We will: a guarantee your child a place on National Citizen Service, so they can /earn new skills anda meet young people from different walks of lifeS promote equal treatment and equal opportunity for all in a society proud of its tolerance5 and diversityFi m give those who work for a big company and the public sector a new workplace entitlement Ez to Volunteering Leave for three days a year, on full pay.-
The Big Society is a vision of a more engaged nation, oneand highlighted the great work done in communities in which we take more responsibility for ourselves and ourwith the Big Society Awards and the Prime Minister’s neighbours; communities working together, not dependingPoints of Light award.
on remote and impersonal bureaucracies. Of course, there are many tasks which require the resources and grip ofA generation of teenagers has undertaken National government. But there are also many areas of nationalCitizen Service (NCS), developing their skills, broadening life in which we need more people to step forward, taketheir horizons and growing in confidence; over the next responsibility and play their part. This is about a nationalfive years, we will expand NCS ~ so it becomes a rite of culture change, saying to everyone in Britain: ask what youpassage for young people in our country. We will give can do for your community and your country. more people the power and support to run a school, start their own social enterprise, and take over their own local parks, landmarks and pubs. We will encourage the l,4OO
Volunteerin 8 isatal Oyea rcommunities engaged in neighbourhood planning to h igh, with 3 million more adultscompte me pivees me assist others to draw up their giving their time last year thaneeed we will take new steps to encourage: volunteering, enabling more people to join the unsung in 2OlOheroes who are the backbone of communities across
Britain.
In the past five years, there has been real progress..
Volunteering is now at a ten-year high, with over threeOur pla n of action:
million more adults giving their time last year than in the year to March 2OlO. Charitable donations are on the - We will expand National Citizen Service up, with one million more people giving to good causes than at the end of the last Parliament. There are nowOver l3O, OOO young people have graduated from NCS parents’ groups and charities running their own freeand we have now guaranteed a place on NCS for every schools. ‘There are social enterprises helping people intol6 and l7year-old who wants one. In addition to this, jobs through the Work Programme. We have launchedwe will increase the number of cadet units in schools, so the world’s first social investment bank, introduced morethat more students have the chance to learn skills such as social impact bonds than the rest of the world combinedleadership and self-reliance.
THE BEST SCHOOLS AND HOSPITALS FORYOUANDYOURFAMILY 222 THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5
We will innovate in how we deliver publicgovernor. We have always believed that churches, faith servicesgroups and other voluntary groups play an important and longstanding role in this country’s social fabric, running
We have pioneered ways to deliver high-quality publicfoodbanks, helping the homeless, and tackling debt and services, including through getting the voluntary sectoraddictions, such as alcoholism and gambling. We have more involved. For example, our Work Programme hasalready introduced tougher regulation of gambling, with helped harness the talent and energy of charities to helpenhanced player protections and planning controls to people turn their lives around and find their way backprevent the further proliferation of high street betting into work. We will examine ways to build on this type ofshops; we've capped payday lending and backed financial innovative approach in the future. We have also pioneeredinclusion; and will continue to support action that helps the use of social impact bonds and paymentby-results, vulnerable people get the assistance they need.
and we will look to scale these up in the future, focusing on youth unemployment, mental health and homelessness. We will champion equal rights and correct past wrongs
We will help you volunteer and support action to help the vulnerableOur historic introduction of gay marriage has helped drive forward equality and strengthened the institution
We will support the Prince of Wales’ Step Up ‘To Serveof marriage. But there is still more to do, and we initiative, encouraging young people to serve in theirwill continue to champion equality for Lesbian, Gay, community. And we will make volunteering for threeBisexual and ‘Transgender people. We will build on the days a year a workplace entitlement for people working inposthumous pardon of Enigma codebreaker Alan ‘Turing, large companies and the public sector. People could, forwho committed suicide following his conviction for gross example, volunteer for a local charity or serve as a schoolindecency, with a broader measure to lift the bight of outdated convictions of this nature. ‘Thousands of British men still suffer from similar historic charges, even though
Over l3O, OOO young peo pl eva wok be compe innocent of ny ome voces:: any others are dead and cannot correct this injustice n hi taken ee rt in Nationalthemselves through the legal process we have introduced
Citizen Servicewhile in government. So we will introduce a new law that will pardon those people, and right these wrongs.
Fna
Making government work better for youZ
): s
Our commitment to you: u
The government is the servant of the British people. Every pound spent must be scrutinised, anda government run as efficiently and effectively as possible. We will: e m save you money by cutting government waste2 m put more of the essential services you use online, to make them more convenienta ie) m continue to make government more transparent, so you can hold us to account for howwu.. Nn your money is being spent. HF aII
Government is the servant of the British people, not~ no master. That oes fact was forgotten when£l4.3 billion was saved in abour was in power. Quangos grew in number,_..
wasteful projects proliferated and the bureaucracy2Ol4 thro Us h effi © ences In swelled - symptoms of a Government that believed itgovernment - equiva lent to always knew best. nearly £85O for every working household
Hardworking taxpayers des erve a &' overnmentto tackle voting fraud. ‘These measures will help to restore th at i §s more e fic i ent an dpublic confidence in British politics.
accountai le
Conservatives have brought in a new approach. We are determined to measure success not by how muchWe will cut government waste money is spent, but how much it improves people’s lives. Whitehall is now leaner and smaller than at anyWe have reduced the cost of government, by selling time since the Second World War. We have halvedempty buildings, managing big projects better, shrinking the running costs of the Department for Education. the Civil Service, reforming pensions, moving more
We have abolished or merged over 3OO quangos. Weservices online, and improving contracting. We plan a have moved paperwork online. We have shone a brightfurther £lO billion annual savings by 2Ol7l8 and £l5light on government spending - requiring all central2O billion in 2Ol92O.
government spending over £25, OOO to be published online. We have also ensured that people recieve a transparent breakdown of how their taxes are spent.
In the next five years, we will ensure this efficiency°oe revolution continues. We will also continue to reform ourTo el iminate th e def ICI C, we political system: make votes of more equal value throughmust con ti nue t° cyt out long overdue boundary reforms, reducing the number of
MPs and ensuring the Electoral Commission does morewas tefl ul Sp en di PS
THE BEST SCHOOLS AND HOSPITALS FOR YOU AND YOUR FAMILY47hi
‘dete. i
ATLL Gh:- eee
ALY&
CU ORT RA RA
Aosa
We will deliver better public services and more We will reform ParliamenteS open government<
We have improved the operation of Parliament,9
We have supported the growth of public service mutuals -strengthening its ability to hold the Government to account,5 organisations that are owned by their staff and deliver publicwith reforms such as the election of Select Committee chairsa services. We want more of them, so we will guarantee aand the creation of the Backbench Business Committee,<
‘night to mutualise’ within the public sector. This will free upwhich enables backbenchers, for the first time, to determinee the entrepreneurial spirit of public servants and yield bettera significant proportion of the House of Commons’2 value for money for taxpayers. ‘Transparency has also beenbusiness. We have also passed the Fixed ‘Term Parliament at the heart of our approach to government. Over the lastAct, an unprecedented transfer of Executive power. In> five years, we have been open about government spending, the next Parliament, we will address the unfairness of the9 provided access to taxpayer-funded research, pursuedcurrent Parliamentary boundaries, reduce the number& open data and helped establish the Open Governmentof MPs to 6OO to cut the cost of politics and make votesnl
Partnership. We will continue to be the most transparentof more equal value. We will implement the boundaryui government in the world. We addressed public concernreforms that Parliament has already approved and make about the influence of money on politics, with a law thatthem apply automatically once the Boundary Commissionstrengthened rules governing non-party campaigningreports in 2Ol8. This will deal with the fact that the current and established a register of consultant lobbyists. In theelectoral layout over-represents parts of the country where next Parliament, we will legislate to ensure trade unionspopulations have been falling and under-represents parts use a transparent optin process for subscriptions towhere populations have been rising.
political parties. We will continue to seek agreement on a comprehensive package of party funding reform. We will ensure that the House of Lords fi ulfils its valuable role as a chamber of legislative
We will make government more efficientscrutiny and revision
We value our outstanding public servants. Over the last fiveWhile we still see a strong case for introducing an elected years, we have made efficiencies in government. We haveelement into our second chamber, this is not a priority in ruled out the introduction of regional pay in the publicthe next Parliament. We have already allowed for expulsion sector, which we do not support and will not introduce. of members for poor conduct and will ensure the House of
Britain's impartial, professional and highly capable CivilLords continues to work well by addressing issues such as the
Service is admired around the world and one of our nation'ssize of the chamber and the retirement of peers.
strengths. We will push ahead with reform of the Civil
Service to make it more dynamic and streamlined. WeWe will protect our electoral system, to will make recruitment to the Civil Service more open andsafeguard our democracy actively look for exceptional talent, especially in areas where capabilities are in short supply. We will continue to tackleBuilding on our introduction of individual voter all the bureaucracy of Whitehall that clogs the arteries ofregistration, we will continue to make our arrangements government. We will end taxpayer-funded six-figure payoffsfair and effective by ensuring the Electoral Commission for the best paid public sector workers. We will continue toputs greater priority on tackling fraud and considers sell unneeded government property and colocate servicesinsisting on proof of ID to vote. We will complete the wherever possible. We have already created 2O high-qualityelectoral register, by working to include more of the five digital services, which include apprenticeships applicationsmillion Britons who live abroad. We will introduce votes for and tax self-assessments. We will save you time, hassle andlife, scrapping the rule that bars British citizens who have money by moving more services online, while activelylived abroad for more than l5 years from voting. We will tackling digital exclusion. We will ensure digital assistance isrespect the will of the British people, as expressed in the always available for those who are not online, while rolling2Oll referendum, and keep First Past the Post for elections out cross-government technology platforms to cut costs andto the House of Commons. And we will introduce English improve productivity - such as GOV'UK. votes for English laws, answering the longstanding West
Lothian Question in our democracy.
THE BEST SCHOOLS AND HOSPITALS FORYOUANDYOURFAMILY ag7 _ F ine. I
’i 9, dj <
“4 re, ay
FY gee ee oe a uf r
I (ee SH A
( OY ip7, i, bA 35 &Sg“-/
~ ag SS a,- f l ry; esfa)
Helping you to buy a home of your owna
Our commitment to you: E
The chance to own your own home should be available to everyone who works hard. We will:3 a help to keep mortgage rates lower by continuing to work through our long-termes economic plan2 m build more homes that people can afford, including 2OO, OOO new Starter Homes exclusively TE for first-time buyers under 4Owu m extend the Help to Buy Equity Loan scheme to 2O2O to help more people onto and up thehousing ladder, and introduce a new Help to Buy ISA to support people saving for a deposit m give more people the chance to own their home by extending the Right to Buy to tenants of
Housing Associations and create a Brownfield Fund to unlock homes on brownfield land m ensure local people have more control over planning and protect the Green Belt
Conservatives believe passionately in home ownership.
We understand how good it feels when you have workedE ver yon e wh oO wor. ks h or d long hours, saved money for years, and finally takeS h ou / d b ea b le toowna possession of the keys to your first home. For years,.
however, people have been finding it harder and harderh ome oO if th Clr O\ Sh.
to get on the housing ladder. Under Labour, housebuilding fell to its lowest peacetime level since theAs the party of home ownership, we want to go further l92Os. Developers were building too few homes andand faster - and this manifesto sets out our plan. At its the aftermath of the banking crisis saw young peopleheart, a clear objective to build affordable homes, including struggling to raise a deposit.2OO, OOO Starter Homes which will be sold at a 2O per cent discount, and will be built exclusively for first time buyers under the age of 4O. At the same time, we will extend our oy:.. Help to Buy Equity Loan scheme, introduce a new Help to
Ho use buildi Ng at its h igh estBuy ISA, extend the Right to Buy to Housing Association since 2OO7tenants and make sure that, when it comes to planning decisions, local people are in charge.
These past five years have been about reversing thisAnd for all those already in their home, we will make trend. We have unblocked the planning system, to helpsure we continue working through our economic plan, builders start building again. We have introduced Helpso mortgage rates stay lower for longer and people to Buy, making it much easier for people to secure acan keep hold of their homes and plan for the future mortgage. And we have reinvigorated the Right to Buy- safe in the knowledge they have a government that is which Labour had cut back, extending home ownershipcompetently looking after the public finances so they to a whole new generation of social tenants. As a result, can look after their own.
over 2OO, OOO people have been helped either on or up the housing ladder. Most of those helped have been young first-time buyers spread right across our country.
SECURING YOUR HOME AND YOUR NEIGHBOURHOOD5lTHE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5
We wi I I con ti nue to wo rkto help people save for a deposit.
through our plan, soWe will extend the Right to Buy to tenants in mortgage rates stay lowerHousing Associations f or I ong: erWe will extend the Right to Buy to tenants in Housing
Associations to enable more people to buy a home of. their own. It is unfair that they should miss out on a
Our p lan of action: right enjoyed by tenants in local authority homes. We;;; will fund the replacement of properties sold under the
We will double the number of first-timeextended Right to Buy by requiring local authorities to buyers, and help more people own theirmanage their housing assets more efficiently, with the own homemost expensive properties sold off and replaced as they fall vacant. We will also create a Brownfield Fund to
We are setting an ambition to double the number ofunlock homes on brownfield land for additional housing.
first-time buyers compared to the last five years - helping one million more people to own their own home. We willWe will give you the Right to Build extend Help to Buy to cover another l2O, OOO homes - in total helping over 2OO, OOO people and we will continueWe aim at least to double the number of custom-built the Help to Buy mortgage guarantee until the start ofand self-built homes by 2O2O, and we will take forward
2Ol7, and the Help to Buy equity loan until at least 2O2O. a new Right to Build, requiring councils to allocate land
From this autumn, we will introduce a new Help to Buyto local people to build or commission their own home,
ISA to support people who are working hard to save upas you can do in most of Europe.
for a deposit for their first home. A ten per cent deposit on the average first home costs £l5, OOO, so if you putWe will protect the Green Belt in up to £l2, OOO, government will put in up to £3, OOO more. A 25 per cent topup is equivalent to saving aWe have safeguarded national Green Belt protection deposit from your pre-tax income - making it effectively aand increased protection of important green spaces.
tax cut for first-time buyers. We have abolished the Labour Government’s top-down
Regional Strategies which sought to delete the Green
Belt in and around 3O towns and cities and introduced
Our new Hel p to B uy ISAa new Local Green Space planning designation which will support people who areallows councils and neighbourhood plans to give added. protection to valuable local green spaces.
working hard to save fora depositWe will support locally-led garden cities and towns and prioritise brownfield development, making sure new homes are always matched by
We will build 2OO, OOO Starter Homes andthe necessary infrastructure to support them more affordable housingWe will support locally-led garden cities and towns in places where communities want them, such as Ebbsfleet
We will build 2OO, OOO quality Starter Homes over theand Bicester. When new homes are granted planning course of the next Parliament, reserved for first-timepermission, we will make sure local communities buyers under 4O and sold at 2O per cent below the marketknow upfront that necessary infrastructure such as price. We have delivered over 2l7, OOO new affordableschools and roads will be provided. We will ensure that homes since 2OlO. We will now go further, deliveringbrownfield land is used as much as possible for new
275, OOO additional affordable homes by 2O2O. And wedevelopment. We will require local authorities to have a will offer lO, OOO new homes to rent at below market rates, register of what is available, and ensure that 9O per cent
Syfa of suitable brownfield sites have planning permission forfor example, with the ‘Troubled Families Programme and2 housing by 2O2O. To meet the capital’s housing needs, the Better Care Fund - to promote savings and improve< we will create a new London Land Commission, with alocal services. We want local councils to help manage5 mandate to identify and release all surplus brownfieldpublic land and buildings, and will give them at least a lOa land owned by the public sector. We will fund Housingper cent stake in public sector land sales in their area.4
Zones to transform brownfield sites into new housing,> which will create 95, OOO new homes. We will help you builda strong localeconomy [&
Ave rage counc il tax bills inWe want local authorities to help create strong local:. economies. Building on the local retention of businessS
E ngl and have fall en, In realrates introduced in 2Ol2, we will promote localism byce terms; by ll per centallowing councils to keep a higher proportion of therm business rates revenue that is generated in their area. ua
This will provide a strong financial incentive for councils.. to promote economic growth. We will review how we
We will help keep your council taxes lowcan further reduce ring-fencing and remove Whitehall
Under this Government, average council tax bills inburdens to give councils more flexibility to support
England have fallen, in real terms, by ll per cent. local services. We will support Business Improvement
Whereas Labour wants to propose a new tax on familyDistricts and other forms of business-led collaboration homes, we will help local authorities keep council taxon high streets - giving more say to local traders on low for hardworking taxpayers, and ensure residentsissues such as minor planning applications, cleaning and can continue to veto high rises via a local referendum. parking. We will continue to support local shops and
And in London, where there is a Conservative Mayor, residents in tackling aggressive parking enforcement and bills have fallen even further. We will continue to workexcessive parking charges, and take steps to tackle rogue with councillors to deliver high quality, value for moneyand unfair practices by private parking operators. Our services. We will encourage voluntary integration ofCoastal Communities Fund will help our seaside areas services and administration between and within councils- _ thrive, helping to boost skills and create jobs.
SECURING YOUR HOME AND YOURNEIGHBOURHOOD) -sss-“‘“<CTHE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5
Protecting and enhancing our natural environment
We set ourselves the goal of being the first generation to leave the natural environment of
England in a better state than that in which we found it. This is a big ambition to which we remain committed. We will:
m putin place a new ‘Blue Belt’ to protect precious marine habitats m invest in cleaner air and water for you and your family keep our forests in trust for the nation
For Conservatives, Britain’s ‘green and pleasant land’Our pla n of action:
is not some relic from a bygone era, to be mourned and missed: it’s the living, breathing backdrop to ourWe will protect your countryside, Green Belt national life. Our moors and meadows, wildlife andand urban environment nature, air and water are a crucial part of our national identity and make our country what it is. So we careWe will spend £3 billion from the Common Agricultural about them deeply, want to protect them for everyonePolicy to enhance England’s countryside over the next five and pass them onto future generations. years, enabling us, among other things, to clean up our rivers and lakes, protect our stonewalls and hedges, and help
Labour never understood this. Our rural communitiesour bees to thrive. We will ensure that our public forests fell further behind urban areas; biodiversity suffered, and woodland are kept in trust for the nation and plant with important species and habitats declining underanother ll million trees. We will make it easier to access our their watch; and they failed to protect the Green Belt. beautiful landscapes, by providing free, comprehensive maps of all open-access green space. Building on our introduction
Over the last five years, we have committed billions ofof a five pence charge on single-use plastic bags, we will pounds to reduce emissions from transport and clean upreview the case for higher Fixed Penalty Notices for littermg our rivers and seas. We have done more to protect ourand allow councils to tackle small-scale fly-trpping through seas, safeguarded our Green Belt and planted ll millionFixed Penalties rather than costly prosecutions. We will trees. And we set out a comprehensive, long-term visionlaunch an ambitious programme of pocket parks - small to protect our natural heritage in this country’s firstareas of inviting public space where people can enjoy relief
White Paper on the Natural Environment for 2O years. from the hustle and bustle of city streets. We will protect the
Green Belt, and maintain national protections for Areas of
Over the next five years, we will put in place strongerOutstanding Natural Beauty, National Parks, Sites of Special protections for our natural landscapes, establish a newScientific Interest and other environmental designations.
Blue Belt to safeguard precious marine habitats, launch a programme of pocket parks in towns and cities andWe will help you enjoy cleaner air and water continue to lead in tackling the illegal wildlife trade.
Our plan is to conserve and enhance our naturalWe will continue to do even more to tackle air pollution environment so that this remains the most beautifuland clean up our rivers and waterways, including country in the world. supporting the Thames Tideway ‘Tunnel. We have spent over £3 billion on improving flood defences, and capped the cost of flood insurance. We will now go further, building l,4OO new flood defence schemes, to protect 3OO, OOO homes.
Spfa)
We will build new infrastructure in anhigh animal welfare standards to be incorporated intoa environmentally-sensitive wayinternational trade agreements and into reform of the<
Common Agricultural Policy. We will ban wild animals5
We will build new roads and railways in a way that limits, in circuses and press for all EU member states to ensurea as far as possible, their impact on the environment. ‘Thisthat animals are only sent to slaughterhouses that4 includes investing £3OO million in cutting light pollutionmeet high welfare standards. We will encourage other> from new roads, doing more tunnelling, building bettercountries to follow the EU’s lead in banning animalS noise barriers and helping to restore lost habitat. Wetesting for cosmetics and work to accelerate the global will also replace locally any biodiversity lost in thedevelopment and takeup of alternatives to animal2 construction of High Speed 2. We set up the Naturaltesting where appropriate. We want people to integrateg
Capital Committee to put hard economic numbers on thefully into British society, but that does not mean theyeS value of our environment, and we will extend its life to atshould have to give up the things they hold dear in theirrm least the end of the next Parliament. We will work with itreligion. So while we will always make sure the Foodua to develop a 25 Year Plan to restore the UK’s biodiversity, Standards Agency properly regulates the slaughter and to ensure that both public and private investment inof livestock and poultry, we will protect methods of the environment is directed where we need it most. religious slaughter, such as shechita and halal.
We want to protect ourA record investment in Britain’s environment for futureflood defences - over £3 billion generatic 2:
We will create a ‘Blue Belt’ to protect preciousWe will tackle international wildlife trade marine habitatsAs hosts of the London Conference on the Illegal Wildlife
Earlier this year, we announced the creation of a new‘Trade, we helped secure the adoption of the London
Marine Protected Area around the Pitcairn Islands - theDeclaration on Illegal Wildlife Trade and will continue largest protected expanse of sea in the world. We willto lead the world in stopping the poaching that kills now go even further, creating a Blue Belt around thethousands of rhinos, elephants and tigers each year. We
UK’s l4 Overseas ‘Territories, subject to local support andwill oppose any resumption of commercial whaling, and environmental need. We will designate a further protectedseek further measures at the EU and internationally to area at Ascension Island, subject to the views of the localend shark-finning. We will promote effective worldwide community. And, off our own coasts, we will completemeasures for tuna conservation, press for a total ban on the network of Marine Conservation Zones that we haveivory sales, and support the Indian Government in its already started, to create a UK Blue Belt of protected sites. efforts to protect the Asian elephant. We will press for full ‘endangered species’ status for polar bears and a ban
We will protect animal welfareon the international trade in polar bear skins, as well as for greater attention to be paid to the impact of climate
The quality of the food on your plate, and the economicchange on wildlife and habitats in Polar Regions in the security of our farmers, depend on us upholding theArctic Council and other international fora.
highest standards of animal welfare. We will push for
SECURING YOUR HOME AND YOURNEIGHBOURHOOD) -es-‘“‘“<“<CTHE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5
Guaranteeing you clean, affordable and secure energy supplies
Affordable, reliable energy is critical to our economy, to our national security, and to family budgets. We will:
keep your bills as low as possible and promote competition in the energy market m ensure your homes and businesses have energy supplies they can rely on help you insulate your home halt the spread of subsidised onshore wind farms m meet our climate change commitments, cutting carbon emissions as cheaply as possible, to save you money
Without secure energy supplies, we leave British familiesWith out secure ene rgy and business at the mercy of fluctuating global oil and.
gas prices; we increase our dependence on foreignsupplies our coun try sources of energy; and we become less safe and less wocperous reg esatebecomes less safe and less prosperous
National energy policy demands a willingness to take decisions today for the good of tomorrow. But Labour took the opposite approach. Power margins - the safetyoffshore wind turbine manufacturing at the new Green cushion we need to prevent blackouts - have fallen toPort in Hull, the next generation of pipelines West of record lows because of their historic failure to investShetland and the Swansea tidal lagoon. Our tax cuts in new capacity. Domestic sources of oil and gas werehave encouraged record levels of investment in existing unexploited. And Labour failed to deliver the nextNorth Sea gas, and the birth of a new industry, shale generation of energy projects that will help us keep thegas, which could create many thousands of jobs.
lights on, drive bills down and reduce carbon emissions.
And we have delivered a better deal for consumers too.
All this hurt consumers. The number of major energyWe have demanded that energy companies simplify suppliers halved and energy bills soared, with thetheir tariffs; encouraged more independent suppliers - average gas bill more than doubling. which now account for ten per cent of the household market; and made it much easier for people to switch
We have taken a different approach. Where Labourenergy providers.
was chronically short-termist, we have secured decent, affordable energy supplies not just for the coming years, But the job is only half done. We need a Conservative but for the coming decades. Government to see through this long-term plan and secure clean but affordable energy supplies for
Our long-term plan has unlocked £59 billion ofgenerations to come. This means a significant expansion investment in electricity. All parts of the UK will soonin new nuclear and gas; backing good-value green be helping to deliver secure, affordable and low-carbonenergy; and pushing for more new investment in UK energy, from the Hinkley Point nuclear power station, toenergy sources. Healthy competition, not short-termist
56fa political intervention, is the best way to secure a good2 deal for consumers. So we will keep on relentlessly3. l million peopl e are now onz pushing for more competition to keep bills low. better ener gy tariffs5
This is a long-term plan to keep the lights on; keep our2 homes warm; and keep families from endless worry> about their energy bills. proceeds through generous community benefit packages. S
We will create a Sovereign Wealth Fund for the Norths of England, so that the shale gas resources of the North2
Under Labour, the average gasare used to invest in the future of the North. We willg bill more than doubledcontinue to support development of North Sea oil andeS gas. We will provide startup funding for promising newrm renewable technologies and research, but will only giveua significant support to those that clearly represent value
Our plan of action: for money.
We will promote competition to keep yourWe will halt the spread of onshore windfarms bills as low as possible;;
Onshore wind now makes a meaningful contribution
We have helped increase the number of independentto our energy mix and has been part of the necessary energy suppliers from seven to 2l, made it easier forincrease in renewable capacity. Onshore windfarms customers to switch to better deals, slashed the numberoften fail to win public support, however, and are unable of tariffs to just 4 per supplier, and cut switching timesby themselves to provide the firm capacity that a stable in half: We will go even further, implementing theenergy system requires. As a result, we will end any new recommendations of the Competition and Marketspublic subsidy for them and change the law so that local
Authority investigation that we triggered. We will ensurepeople have the final say on windfarm applications.
that every home and business in the country has a Smart
Meter by 2O2O, delivered as cost-effectively as possible, We will protect our planet for our children so consumers have instant, accurate bills and can switch to an alternative provider within one day. And we willWe have been the greenest government ever, setting support low-cost measures on energy efficiency, with theup the world’s first Green Investment Bank, signing a goal of insulating a million more homes over the next fivedeal to build the first new nuclear plant in a generation, years, supporting our commitment to tackle fuel poverty. trebling renewable energy generation to l9 per cent, bringing energy efficiency measures to over one million
We will secure your energy supplieshomes, and committing £l billion for carbon capture and storage. We are the largest offshore wind market
We will continue to support the safe development ofin the world. We will push for a strong global climate shale gas, and ensure that local communities share thedeal later this year - one that keeps the goal of limiting global warming to two-degrees firmly in reach. At
We wa nt a b ette r de a / -an dhome, we will continue to support the UK Climate.. Change Act. We will cut emissions as cost-effectively as
I Ow bi l Is - f or h ar d wor k / ngpossible, and will not support additional distorting and fa miI i esexpensive power sector targets.
SECURING YOUR HOME AND YOURNEIGHBOURHOOD) ss-“‘“<_THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5
Fighting crime and standing up for victims
Your local area should be a safe place to grow up, work, raise a family and retire. We will continue to cut crime and make your community safer. We will:
a finish the job of police reform, so you can have more confidence that your local policing team is working effectively m toughen sentencing and reform the prison system, so dangerous criminals are kept off your streets m support victims, so that the most vulnerable in our society get the support they deserve.
m scrap the Human Rights Act and curtail the role of the European Court of Human Rights, so that foreign criminals can be more easily deported from Britain.
Crime is down by more than 2O per cent since 2OlO, with providers paid according to the results they achieve according to the independent Crime Survey, and is at itsin reducing reoffending. We reformed drug treatment so lowest point since records began. Lower crime meansthat abstinence and full recovery is the goal, instead of the fewer robberies, less violence on our streets, fewer livesroutine maintenance of people’s addictions with substitute ruined, and more people able to feel confident about thedrugs. And with new laws to crack down on domestic future. violence, measures to prevent Female Genital Mutilation
Labour didn’t trust our brilliant policemen and women, probation staff and prison officers to do their job, butCrime has been cut by more tried to micromanage every police force from Whitehall,.
doing serious damage to officer morale, police discretionthan a fifth and forces’ performance. And Labour failed to provide sufficient prison places: tens of thousands of prisoners were released early, putting the public at risk.(FGM), the first ever Modern Slavery Act, action to tackle human trafficking and substantial progress in tackling
We have made progress in turning around the situationonline child abuse, we have consistently stood up for the we inherited, with comprehensive reforms to policing, most vulnerable in our society.
rehabilitation and the rights of victims. We have already increased the proportion of officers working on theWe will carry on making every community safer, even frontline, and cut 4.5 million hours of police paperwork. when resources are tight. We will continue reducing
We have given Chief Constables a clear mandate to cutpaperwork, increasing sentence lengths for the most crime, reformed stop and search, established the Nationalserious offences, and making sure that prisons are places
Crime Agency, strengthened the police inspectorate, of rehabilitation.
made the police more accountable through Police and
Crime Commissioners, increased transparency throughWe need to complete our revolution in the way we manage crime maps, and set up the College of Policing to driveoffenders in the community, using the latest technology to up professional standards. keep criminals on the straight and narrow. And we must also become smarter when it comes to crime prevention,
We have made sure that 45, OOO offenders will now receivedealing with the drivers of crime such as drugs and supervision and rehabilitation on release from prison, alcohol. So we will focus not only on punishment, but also
58fa) on rehabilitating offenders and intervening early to preventhave conditions, such as victim redress, attached to theira troubled young people being drawn into crime. punishment. We will create a blanket ban on all new< psychoactive substances, protecting young people from5. exposure to socalled ‘legal highs’. And we will makea
Our pla n of action: sobriety orders available to all courts in England and4
Wales, enforced through new alcohol monitoring tags.>
We will finish the job of police reform, backingfe) officers to fight crime unimpededWe will reform our prison systemox
We will ensure proper provision of health and community-Despite making savings in the prison budget, there areg based places of safety for people suffering mental healtharound 3, OOO more adult male prison places today than ince crises - saving police time and stopping vulnerable people2OlO. We will make further savings by closing old, inefficientrm being detained in police custody. ‘To speed up justice, weprisons, building larger, modern and fit-for-purpose onesua will extend the use of police-led prosecutions. We will allowand expanding paymentby-results. And we will introduce police forces to retain a greater percentage of the valuewidespread random testing of drug use in jails, new body of assets they seize from criminals. We will improve ourscanners, greater use of mobile phone blocking technology response to cyber-crime with reforms to police training andand a new strategy to tackle corruption in prisons.
an expansion in the number of volunteer “Cyber Specials’.
We will enable fire and police services to work more closely together and develop the role of our elected andThere are around 3, OOO more accountable Police and Crime Commissioners. c adult male prison places today
We will transform the relationship betweenthan in 2OlO the police and the public
We have taken action to boost public confidence and trust. a.;; We will protect victims and support the in the police and now want to go even further. We will improve the diversity of police recruitment - especiallyvulnerable of black and ethnic minority officers - by supportingWe have already introduced a new Victims’ Code and the development of new direct entry and fast-tracktaken steps to protect vulnerable witnesses and victims.
schemes such as Police Now, which offers top graduatesNow we will strengthen victims’ rights further, with a new route into policing. We will overhaul the policeanew Victims’ Law that will enshrine key rights for complaints system. We will use the Police Innovation Fundvictims, including the right to make a personal statement to accelerate the adoption of new technologies, includingand have it read in court before sentencing - and before mobile devices, that will transform the service the publicthe Parole Board decides on a prisoner's release. We receives. And we will legislate to mandate changes in policewill give all vulnerable victims and witnesses greater practices if stop and search does not become more targetedopportunity to give evidence outside court, and roll out and stop to arrest ratios do not improve. nationally pre-trial cross examination for child victims.
We will introduce more effective crimeWe will prioritise tackling violence against prevention measures to break the cycle ofwomen and girls offending
We have made protecting women and girls from
We are developing a modern crime prevention strategyviolence and supporting victims and survivors of to address the key drivers of crime. We will publishsexual violence a key priority. We will now work with standards, performance data and a ranking system forlocal authorities, the NHS and Police and Crime the security of smartphones and tablets, as well as onlineCommissioners to ensure a secure future for specialist financial and retail services. We will overhaul the systemFGM and forced marriage units, refuges and rape of police cautions, and ensure that offenders alwayscrisis centres. We will ensure that all publicly-funded
SECURING YOUR HOME AND YOURNEIGHBOURHOOD) -i‘“<“‘<a ‘alTHE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5 advocates have specialist victims' training beforeorientation or transgender identity. We will improve becoming involved in serious sexual offences cases. Wethe treatment of women offenders, exploring how new have set up and independant statutory inquiry intotechnology may enable more women with young children child sexual abuse, and will make sure it can challangeto serve their sentence in the community.
institutions and individuals without fear or favour, and get to the truth. And we will continue the urgent workWe will reform human rights law and our of overhauling how our police, social services and otherlegal system agencies work together to protect vulnerable children, especially from the kind of organised grooming andWe have stopped prisoners from having the vote, and sexual exploitation that has come to light in Rotherham, have deported suspected terrorists such as Abu Qatada, and other towns and cities across the UK. despite all the problems created by Labour’s human rights laws. The next Conservative Government will scrap the
We will toughen sentencing and use newHuman Rights Act, and introduce a British Bill of Rights.
technology to protect the publicThis will break the formal link between British courts and the European Court of Human Rights, and make our
We will continue to reform the way we rehabilitateown Supreme Court the ultimate arbiter of human rights prisoners. We will deploy new technology to monitormatters in the UK. We will continue the £375 million offenders in the community and to bring persistentmodernisation of our courts system, reducing delay and offenders to justice more quickly. A new semi-custodialfrustration for the public. And we will continue to review sentence will be introduced for prolific criminals, allowingour legal aid systems, so they can continue to provide for a short, sharp spell in custody to change behaviour. access to justice in an efficient way.
To tackle those cases where judges get it wrong, we will extend the scope of the Unduly Lenient Scheme, so a.
wider range of sentences can be challenged. We willWe WI I I SCr ap th e H uman review ae eanaton governing hate crimes, including theR i igh ts A ctan d intro d uce a g the scope of the law to cover crimes committed against people on the basis of disability, sexualB r itish B i / / of R i gi } ts eofa eeee(U)
Preventing terrorism, countering extremismrn
Keeping you and your family safe is our overriding priority. The threat of extremism and. a terrorism remains serious, but with our tough, intelligent and comprehensive approach, we will7 confront and ultimately defeat it. We will:5 m strengthen the ability of the police and intelligence agencies to disrupt terrorist plots, Z so the authorities have all the tools they need to prevent attackss fe) deal with online radicalisation and propaganda, so we can reduce the risk of youngvi people being drawn into extremism and terrorism mu tackle all forms of extremism, including non-violent extremism, so our values and our way of life are properly promoted and defended
The first duty of government is to keep you safe. WeThe next Conservative Government will continue to will always do whatever is necessary to protect thetake a tough, intelligent and comprehensive approach
British people. We have protected and increased theto preventing terrorism and confronting extremism.
budgets for the security and intelligence agencies andWe will update our counter-terrorism laws wherever counter-terrorism policing. But the scale of the threatnecessary to make sure they properly reflect the threats to our country from a number of terrorist groupswe face.
remains serious, and the rise of ISIL in Syria and Iraq has created new havens for terrorists from which attacks against Britain can be planned, financed and directed. Abu Hamza and Abu @) atada removed from this country once
We will always do whateverand for all
Is necessar’ t protect the
British peo} leDealing with these threats is not just about new powers.
It is about how we combat extremism in all its forms.
We need to tackle it at root, before it takes the form
However, the nature of the threat we face is makingof violence and terror. At the heart of our approach it more difficult for the security services to identifylies an uncompromising defence of British values, terrorist plots - especially thanks to new technology. Weand a very simple message: in Britain, you do not just must always ensure our outstanding intelligence andenjoy the freedom to live how you choose; you have a security agencies have the powers they need to keepresponsibility to respect others too.
us safe. At the same time, we continue to reject any suggestions of sweeping, authoritarian measures that.
would threaten our hard-won freedoms. In the last yearOur p lan of action:
alone, we have given the authorities greater powers to disrupt and control the movements of people who wantWe will strengthen counter-terrorism powers to travel abroad to fight, including strengthening powers to confiscate the passports of those seeking to travel toWe have strengthened counter-terrorism laws, including commit terrorism. making it easier to stop British nationals travelling
SECURING YOUR HOME AND YOUR NEIGHBOURHOOD6l&® ~*~ ae." \x} er"fa
Oax abroad to fight, and control the return of those who2 do. We will keep up to date the ability of the police andOver 75, OOO pieces of unlawful< security services to access communications data thematerial have been taken down5 who, where, when and how’ of a communication, fhe ja but not its content. Our new communications datarom the internet4 legislation will strengthen our ability to disrupt terrorist> plots, criminal networks and organised child groomingS gangs, even as technology develops. We will maintainterrorism legislation. To restrict the harmful activities the ability of the authorities to intercept the contentof extremist individuals, we will create new Extremism2 of suspects’ communications, while continuing toDisruption Orders. ‘These new powers might, forg strengthen oversight of the use of these powers. instance, prevent those who are seeking to radicalisece young British people online from using the internetrm
We will confront all forms of extremism, or communicating via social media. We will develop ais including non-violent extremismstrategy to tackle the infiltration of extremists into our schools and public services. We will strengthen Ofcom’s
We have already reformed the Prevent strategy so thatrole so that tough measures can be taken against it focuses on non-violent as well as violent extremism. channels that broadcast extremist content.
We will now go even further. We will outlaw groupsWe will enable employers to check whether an that foment hate with the introduction of new Banningindividual is an extremist and bar them from working
Orders for extremist organisations. ‘These could bewith children. And we will take further measures applied to dangerous organisations that fall shortto ensure colleges and universities do not give a of the existing thresholds for proscription underplatform to extremist speakers.
SECURING YOUR HOME AND YOUR NEIGHBOURHOOD63a“ee k. oy: 7 wt rs~s.' a SS I bye ¥
‘- MSF ‘,
-«a ri r.
or iy ' - w I.:‘ j 'i s:~s
PIys
» y ify. ike
THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5S fag eeeea
Dignity in your retirement3 a tC(itidiz«zqG
Our commitment to you: G fa)
If you have worked hard during your life, saved, paid your taxes and done the right thing, you7 deserve dignity and security when you retire. We want Britain to be the best country in which to grow old. We will:
mu take the family home out of Inheritance Tax for al! but the richest by raising the effective threshold for married couples and civil partners to £l million continue to increase the State Pension through our triple lock, so it rises by at least 2.5 per cent, inflation or earnings, whichever is highest m reward saving by introducing a new single-tier pension m give you the freedom to invest and spend your pension however you like - and /et you pass it on to your loved ones tax-free m protect pensioner benefits including the free bus pass, TV licences and Winter Fuel Payment m ensure Britain has a strong economy, so we can continue to protect the NHS and make sure noone is forced to sell their home to pay for care.
Our pensioners have made this country what it is, and weare replacing the Pension Credit - basically a means believe that, in return, younger generations owe it to themtest - with a new Sinele-Tier Pension: whatever people to ensure they have dignity and security in their old age. save, they will keep. And we have introduced a cap on residential social care costs: no one will have to sell
In office, Labour neglected the elderly. ‘They raidedtheir home to pay for care. On top of all this, we have pensions with a £l5O billion stealth tax. One year theyscrapped compulsory annuities, giving people complete increased pensions by a paltry 75 pence. And theycontrol over their pension pots; kept all pensioner did nothing to give people control over their savingsbenefits; and protected NHS spending.
and pensions, or to stop them from having to sell their homes to pay for care. In place of these meagre pensionIn the next five years, as our country recovers and increases, we have introduced the triple lock: the Basicour elderly population grows, we will continue to put
State Pension will now always rise in line with whicheverpensioners at the heart of our long-term economic plan.
is higher - earnings, inflation or 2.5 per cent. Since
2OlO, we have seen the Basic Pension has risen in value.
by £95O. We have abolished the Default RetirementOur pla n of action:
Age, so you can keep working as long as you like. We
We will look after you as you grow older
We are building a BritainWe will cap charges for residential social care from April 2Ol6 and also allow deferred payment where everyone who hasPree ey agreements, so no one has to sell their home. For the worked hard and done thefirst time, individual liabilities will be limited, giving
°°°°everyone the peace of mind that they will receive right thing can enjoy securitythe care they need, and that they will be protected in retirementfrom unlimited costs if they develop very serious care
DIGNITYINYOURRETIREMENT 65- --_a I 7). lle eli Sassiete jre. ‘A. 4 a
‘Ss: oo. io i es. Zz _ /
/ae I,
Cy: {:! N aff. ‘\.
~ I I atte cafe cate I Vicé'$’ + a a ‘gge><eZ
-aisae al ae “isi
Poo. _EK
THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5in
[aa
We will help you support your loved-ones
We will continue to increase thea
Basic State Pension through ourWe have guaranteed that ISAs can now be passed on to a>
Pre, spouse tax-free, so that from this April they are no longera tri pl e lock guara nteesubject to Income ‘Tax and Capital Gains ‘Tax. We have2 abolished the 55 per cent tax on pension pots, so thatRe) when the deceased is 75 or over any beneficiary only has needs - such as dementia. We will protect the NHSto pay their marginal Income ‘Tax rate - normally 2O per budget and we will prioritise funding for dementiacent - when they draw down the pension. And we have research. enabled anyone who dies before the age of 75 to pass on their pension pot completely tax-free, so that beneficiaries
We will guarantee your financial security aswill pay no tax on pensions they inherit or on the income you grow olderthey draw down. And we will take the family home out of tax for all but the richest by increasing the effective
We will keep the triple lock pension system. From AprilInheritance ‘Tax threshold for married couples and civil
2Ol6 we are bringing in a Single Tier Pension; this willpartners to £l million, with a new transferable main effectively abolish means-testing the pensions of peopleresidence allowance of £l75, OOO per person. ‘This who have contributed all their lives. We will maintainwill be paid for by reducing the tax relief on pension all the current pensioner benefits including Winter Fuelcontributions for people earning more than £l5O, OOO.
Payments, free bus passes, free prescriptions and TV licences for the next Parliament, while implementingY the "temperature test" for Winter Fuel Payment, so thatIt s y our money,, y ou worked expats in hot countries no longer receive it. And we willhard for It - and you should allow pensioners to access their pension savings and° decide whether or not to take out an annuity, so they canbe able to p ass It onto y our make their own decisions about their money./ ove do nes
DIGNITYINYOURRETIREMENT 67MAST.
# AS, ae _s rf CN hop" ae
Er is a: vF: ~~]bb a: j. “. ed} aS i 3 a yee ee vo ’ ‘A “IFj 3) i ii us I 4wt Phi, PP {*. 4 Ny i,:
al) ¥; ¢ 4Pye i(eae, 4 ‘ i q al ee a Lae FS iF abt“q Ra\yt ml wel el ui sit:
CEN ee Mok
\ Se bh whine mk: fi. hs i 3 aqrey ee I! re ‘7 te etrt hay cee I ov or i Aah i ‘ ‘;\l. I ae Ni 4 \y -Y 7 voiIN fiesoe AASs ty I } yaa Ra agae
Stronger together: a Union for the 2lst century8 ie). wu)
Wherever you live in the great nations of our United Kingdom, we are on your side. We will:.
m give English MPs a veto over matters only affecting England, including on Income Tax honour in full our commitments to Scotland to devolve extensive new powers a implement the agreed settlement for Wales, handing over more responsibility to the
Welsh Assembly m continue to build a Northern Ireland where politics works, the economy grows and society is strong.
England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland - oursTn town halls, councillors now have more of a say over public is the greatest union of nations the world has ever seen. spending, In communities, local people have the right to
‘Together we have done so much, and we can do muchvote in referendums on council tax rises. Neighbourhoods more. ‘The Conservative Party is the party of the Unionare deciding what is built in their area and what happens to
-and we will always do our utmost to keep our familyassets such as parks and public buildings.
of nations together.
It was right to create the Scottish Parliament and WelshWe be / ieve i n ‘4 / Vi n 4 powe r
Assembly, but the job was not finished. Without thehdk ° ability to raise money, the devolved Parliaments were notto naraworkl ng taxp ay: ers, accountable to taxpayers. Without devolution to localletti n g you decide on the councils and communities, power felt as distant as ever..
And one fundamental unfairness remains today: ScottishIssues th at off ect you an d
MPs are able to cast the decisive vote on matters that.
only affected England and Wales, while English andyour fan ly
Welsh MPs cannot vote on matters that only affect
Scotland. ‘This leaves a space for resentment to fester -Our commitment to the Union means we want to and put our Union in jeopardy. strengthen it. We will let local people have more say on local planning and let them vote on local issues. We will
We have tackled the problems we inherited. First, wenot let anyone impose artificial regions on England - held the referendum on Scottish independence. It wasour traditional towns, boroughs, cities and counties are the right thing to do, and the question of Scotland’shere to stay. We will continue devolution settlements place in the United Kingdom is now settled. We havefor Scotland and Wales, and implement the Stormont made the Scottish Parliament and Welsh AssemblyHouse Agreement in Northern Ireland. And we will give responsible for funding more of what they spend. WeEnglish MPs a veto over English-only matters, including have agreed with Northern Ireland’s parties a deal toon Income ‘Tax - answering the West Lothian Question.
help ensure that politics works, the economy grows and society is more cohesive and united. And we have set outIn the last five years, we have proven that we are the clear plans for English votes for English laws. party of the Union. We will go further in the next
Parliament, pushing power out beyond Westminster,
All this reflects a core Conservative belief: power to theCardiff Bay, Holyrood and Stormont, so we keep our people. Around Britain you can see that principle in practice. United Kingdom strong and secure for the long term.
KEEPING OURCOUNTRYSECURE 89THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5
Our plan of action: We will honour in full our commitments to
Scotland
We will build an enduring settlement for the
United KingdomA new Scotland Bill will be in our first Queen’s Speech and will be introduced in the first session of a new Parliament.
We will work to ensure a stable constitution that is fair toWe will implement the recommendations of the Smith the people of England, Scotland, Wales, and NorthernCommission so that more than 5O per cent of the Scottish
Ireland. We will strengthen and improve devolutionParliament’s budget will be funded from revenues raised in for each part of our United Kingdom in a way thatScotland and it will have significant new welfare powers to accepts that there is no one-size-fits-all solution: we willcomplement existing devolved powers in health and social implement the Smith Commission and St David’s Daycare. We will provide the Scottish Parliament with one of
Agreement or equivalent changes in the rest of the UK, the most extensive packages of tax and spending powers including English votes for English laws. of any devolved legislature in the world. We will retain the
Barnett Formula as the basis for determining the grant
We will give English MPs a veto over mattersto cover that part of the Scottish Parliament’s budget not only affecting Englandfunded by tax revenues raised in Scotland. We will agree new rules with the Scottish Government for how the block
We will maintain the Westminster Parliament as the UKgrant will be adjusted, to take account of the new devolved and England’s law-making body. But we want Parliamenttax and welfare powers. And we will ensure that where to work in a way that ensures decisions affecting England, responsibility for taxation has been devolved, tax changes or England and Wales, can only be taken with the consentonly affect public spending in that part of the country.
of the majority of MPs representing constituencies in
England, or in England and Wales. We will end the manifestWe will implement Wales’ devolution unfairness whereby Scotland is able to decide its own laws insettlement devolved areas, only for Scottish MPs also to be able to have the potentially decisive say on similar matters that affect onlyWe will clarify the division of powers between Wales
England and Wales. We will maintain the integrity of theand the UK Government. We will:
UK Parliament by ensuring that MPs from all parts of the
UK continue to deliberate and vote together, including to setm devolve to the Welsh Assembly control over its own overall spending levels. But we will: affairs - including the Assembly name, size and electoral system, Assembly elections and voting age.
m change parliamentary procedures so that the detail of legislation affecting only England or England and Wales @ implement other recommendations of the second will be considered by a Committee drawn in proportionSilk Report where there is all-party support as set to party strength in England or England and Wales. out in the St David’s Day Agreement; this will include devolving to the Welsh Assembly important m adda new stage to how English legislation iseconomic powers over ports and energy consents.
passed; no bill or part of a bill relating only to
England would be able to pass to its Third Readingm introduce a new Wales Bill if these changes require and become law without being approved through alegislation.
legislative consent motion by a Grand Committee made up of all English MPs, or all English andTM continue to reserve policing and justice as matters for
Welsh MPs. the UK Parliament.
m@ extend the principle of English consent to financialTM@ introduce a ‘funding floor’ to protect Welsh relative matters such as how spending is distributed withinfunding and provide certainty for the Welsh Government
England and to taxation - including an English rateto plan for the future, once it has called a referendum on of Income ‘Tax - when the equivalent decisions haveIncome ‘Tax powers in the next Parliament.
been devolved to Scotland.
Soae wa) m make the Welsh Government responsible for raisingwomen of the Police Service of Northern Ireland.5 more of the money it spends so the Welsh people can hold their politicians to account. m work to implement fully and faithfully the historic5
Stormont House Agreement to enable devolution toy
We will continue to build a Northern Irelandfunction more effectively; to deal with the legacy ofa where politics works, the economy grows andthe past; and to make progress on divisive issues such¥ society is strongas flags and parading.»
We will maintain Northern Ireland’s position withinTM continue to work closely with the Northern Ireland the United Kingdom on the basis of the consent of itsExecutive to implement commitments in the 2Ol3 people. Our strong support for the political institutionseconomic pact to rebalance the economy and to established over the past two decades as a result of thebuild a more united and stronger society.
various Agreements will continue. We will:
m complete the devolution of Corporation ‘Tax powers m put the safety and security of the people of Northernto the Assembly, consistent with the Executive
Ireland as our highest priority. We will develop andfulfilling its commitments on finance, welfare reform implement our strategy to combat terrorism, givingand efficiencies in the Stormont House Agreement.
the strongest possible support to the brave men and
KEEPING OURCOUNTRY SECURE TDTHE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5
Real change in our relationship with the European Union
For too long, your voice has been ignored on Europe. We will:
m give you a say over whether we should stay in or leave the EU, with an inout referendum by the end of 2Ol7 m commit to keeping the pound and staying out of the Eurozone reform the workings of the EU, which is too big, too bossy and too bureaucratic reclaim power from Brussels on your behalf and safeguard British interests in the Single
Market m back businesses to create jobs in Britain by completing ambitious trade deals and reducing red tape.
The EU needs to change. And it is time for the BritishBut there is much more to do. ‘The EU is too bureaucratic people - not politicians - to have their say. Only theand too undemocratic. It interferes too much in our
Conservative Party will deliver real change and real choicedaily lives, and the scale of migration triggered by new on Europe, with an inout referendum by the end of 2Ol7. members joining in recent years has had a real impact on local communities. We are clear about what we want from
Labour failed to give you a choice on the EU. ‘TheyEurope. We say: yes to the Single Market. Yes to turbohanded over major new powers to Brussels withoutcharging free trade. Yes to working together where we are your consent, and gave away £7 billion of the Britishstronger together than alone. Yes to a family of nation rebate. We have taken action in Europe to promote yourstates, all part of a European Union - but whose interests, economic security. We cut the EU budget for the firstcrucially, are guaranteed whether inside the Euro or out.
time ever, saving British taxpayers £8. l5 billion. We tookNo to ‘ever closer union.’ No to a constant flow of power
Britain out of Eurozone bailouts, including for Greece -to Brussels. No to unnecessary interference. And no, of the first ever return of powers from Brussels. Our Primecourse, to the Euro, to participation in Eurozone bail-outs
Minister vetoed a new EU treaty that would have damagedor notions like a European Army.
Britain’s interests. And we have pursued a bold, positive, pro-business agenda, exempting smallest businesses fromIt will be a fundamental principle of a future Conservative red tape, promoting free trade, and pushing to extend theGovernment that membership of the European Union
Single Market to new sectors, like digital. depends on the consent of the British people - and in recent years that consent has worn wafer-thin. ‘That’s why, after the election, we will negotiate a new settlement for... Britain in Europe, and then ask the British people whether
We be I feve In I ett! ng th ethey want to stay in the EU on this reformed basis or leave.,;°; David Cameron has committed that he will only lead a p cop le de cide: so we will holdgovernment that offers an inout referendum. We will hold an inout r efe rendum on ourthat inout referendum before the end of 2Ol7 and respect
°the outcome.
membership of the EU before the e nd of 2Ol7So the choice at this election is clear: Labour and the
72ae
Liberal Democrats won’t give you a say over the EU. the Treaty to which every EU country has to sign up.5
UKIP can’t give you a say. Only the ConservativeFurthermore, we will continue to ensure that defence
Party will deliver real change in Europe - and only thepolicy remains firmly under British national control,5
Conservatives can and will deliver an inout referendum. maintaining NATO and the transatlantic relationship as2 the cornerstones of our defence and security policy. it
Our plan of action: We will scrap the Human Rights Act»
We will let you decide whether to stay inWe will scrap Labour's Human Rights Act and introduce or leave the EUa British Bill of Rights which will restore common sense to the application of human rights in the UK. The Bill
We will legislate in the first session of the next Parhamentwill remain faithful to the basic principles of human for an inout referendum to be held on Britain’srights, which we signed up to in the original European membership of the EU before the end of 2Ol7. We willConvention on Human Rights. It will protect basic rights, negotiate a new settlement for Britain in the EU. And thenlike the right to a fair trial, and the right to life, which are we will ask the British people whether they want to stayan essential part of a modern democratic society. But it will in on this basis, or leave. We will honour the result of thereverse the mission creep that has meant human rights law referendum, whatever the outcome. being used for more and more purposes, and often with little regard for the rights of wider society. Among other
We will protect Britain's economythings the Bill will stop terrorists and other serious foreign criminals who pose a threat to our society from using
We will protect our economy from any further integrationspurious human rights arguments to prevent deportation.
of the Eurozone. The integration of the Eurozone has raised acute questions for non-Eurozone countries like theWe will take action in Europe to make
United Kingdom. We benefit from the Single Market andyou better off do not want to stand in the way of the Eurozone resolving its difficulties. Indeed, given the trade between Britain andWe want an EU that helps Britain move ahead, not the Eurozone countries we want to see these economiesone that holds us back. We have already succeeded returning to growth. But we will not let the integration ofin exempting our smallest businesses from new EU the Eurozone jeopardise the integrity of the Smgle Marketregulations, and kicked-off negotiations for a massive or in any way disadvantage the UK. EU trade deal with the USA, which could be worth billions of pounds to the UK economy. We will build
We will reclaim powers from Brusselson this. We want to preserve the integrity of the Single
Market, by insisting on protections for those countries
We want to see powers flowing away from Brussels, notthat have kept their own currencies. We want to expand to it. We have already taken action to return around lOOthe Single Market, breaking down the remaining barriers powers, but we want to go further. We want nationalto trade and ensuring that new sectors are opened parliaments to be able to work together to block unwantedup to British firms. We want to ensure that new rules
European legislation. And we want an end to ourtarget unscrupulous behaviour in the financial services commitment to an ‘ever closer union,’ as enshrined inindustry, while safeguarding Britain as a global centre of excellence in finance. So we will resist EU attempts to. restrict legitimate financial services activities. We will press
David Cameron vetoed a new EUfor lower EU spending, further reform of the Common
Treaty that would have dama g edAgricultural Policy and Structural Funds, and for EU
Britain’s interests - the first timemoney to be focused on promoting jobs and growth.
in history that a British Prime
Minister has done so
KEEPING OURCOUNTRYSECURE TB_
-\ % ¥
I*ae eeeeSs
A Britain standing tall in the worldS ie): Z
Our commitment to you:< lui
Everything we do around the world will be driven by a determination to protect your securityx and help you prosper. We will:
m ensure Britain is a major player on the world stage, using diplomacy to protect your interests, uphold British values and tackle threats to your security and prosperity a help generate new trade, investment and job opportunities, to benefit you and your family maintain our world class Armed Forces so they continue to guarantee your security a uphold our commitment to spend O.7 per cent of gross national income on international development.
Economic security and national security are two sidesWe and our allies face major challenges: Islamist of the same coin. Without one, you cannot have theextremism, an aggressive Russia, economic uncertainty other. Our prosperity depends upon Britain remainingin the Eurozone, nuclear proliferation and infectious an active, outward-looking nation, one that is engageddiseases. A Conservative Government will tackle these with the world, not looking in on itself. We will maintainchallenges. We will use our membership of NATO, the
Britain’s strong global role and our capacity to projectEU, the Commonwealth, our UN Security Council seat,
British power and values around the world. our Special Relationship with the USA, our intelligence agencies, vital institutions like the BBC World Service and British Council, and the strong personal links
We wan t as tr Ong, 7 Securebetween our diaspora communities and other countries, hihfor Britain.
and stable countryto achieve the best for Britain
Labour’s Great Recession weakened Britain on theOnl with a strong econom world stage. They left a £38 billion black hole in theY.. &y defence budget, went l2 years without conductingcan we maintain our wor. I d -
Strategic Def Review, and, at times, failed t a Strategic Defence Review, and, at times, failed toclass Armed Forces and provide our Armed Forces with the equipment they. I needed in Afghanistan. They shut down over 3Oprotect our national security
British diplomatic missions, failed to plan properly for
Iraq’s reconstruction, ignored trade and investment opportunities overseas, and neglected vital relationships. We will back this up with UK military power and international aid. Our long-term economic plan will
We have strengthened Britain’s influence in the world. ‘Theensure we have the economic strength to maintain
National Security Council that we established ensures proper, our world-class Armed Forces, to uphold our national strategic decision-making at the top of government. We havesecurity and project power globally. Aid helps prevent boosted exports to emerging markets, opened new diplomaticfailed states from becoming havens for terrorists.
posts in Africa, Asia and Latin America, and led the worldIt builds long-term markets for our businesses, by in promoting women’s rights and tackling sexual violence inpromoting global prosperity, and reduces migration conflict. We have balanced the defence budget and set out apressures. So we will maintain our commitment to clear strategy to defend our nation for the long term. tackling conflict, poverty and disease around the world.
KEEPING OUR COUNTRY SECURE75THE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5
A stronger voice for our nation on the world stage
Our p lan of action: boost our prosperity. UK exports to China have more than doubled since 2OO9. We will do more, using the new
We will keep you secureembassies and diplomatic posts we have opened to connect
Britain to the fastest-growing economies in the world. We
We will tackle global terrorism and the poisonouswill push for freer global trade, concluding major trade deals ideology of Islamist extremism while taking a patient, with the US, India and Japan and reinvigorating the World long-term approach to preventing conflict and state‘Trade Organisation. As part of our drive to attract more failure. We will work with our partners to address threatsinvestment into the UK and increase British exports, we will:
to UK security, including the spread of nuclear, chemical and biological weapons, pandemic diseases, the illegalm build on our strong relationship with India, push drugs trade, piracy and organised crime. We will: for an ambitious EUIndia trade deal and support
India’s bid for permanent representation on the UN m work for peace, stability and an inclusive settlementSecurity Council in Syria and Iraq; and pursue a comprehensive political and military strategy to defeat ISILm strengthen our economic links with China, doubling support for British firms selling goods there and m@ uphold the sovereignty, integrity and capacity ofchampioning an EUChina trade deal.
Ukraine, and continue to reject Russia’s illegal annexation of Crimea
UK exports to China have more m stand shoulder to shoulder with our NATO allies, than doubled since 2OO9 reassuring all its members - especially those closest to Russia - of their security, and continue to support the Euro-Atlantic path for Western Balkan nations mTM ensure that the significant achievements of ourWe will stand up for British values
Armed Forces in Afghanistan are maintained; andOur long-term security and prosperity depend on a support the Government of Afghanistan in ensuringstable international system that upholds our values.
that the country remains stable and never againOver the last five years, we have stood up for what we becomes a haven for international terroristsbelieve in: intervening to stop a massacre in Libya, leading the world in tackling sexual violence in conflict,
-TM support a two-state solution to the Israeli-Palestinianand helping women and children who have fled violence conflict, robustly defending the right of Israel toin Syria. We will continue this leadership. We will protect its security, while continuing to condemnstand up for the freedom of people of all religions - illegal settlement building, which undermines theand non-religious people - to practise their beliefs in prospects for peacepeace and safety, for example by supporting persecuted
Christians in the Middle East. We will strengthen the m protect global security by helping to leadCommonwealth’s focus on promoting democratic values international efforts to prevent Iran from obtainingand development. We will drive forward the Preventing a nuclear weapon; and work to ensure that NorthSexual Violence in Conflict Initiative. We will support
Korea ends its development of nuclear weapons. global processes on arms control. And we will continue to support universal human rights. We will:
We will help make you better off m@ uphold our Special Relationship with the USA
Over the last five years, we have used foreign policy toand further strengthen our ties with our close
Sea
Commonwealth allies, Australia, Canada and NewmTM support a democratic transition in Burma5
Zealandny
TM promote reconciliation and human rights in Sri5 m uphold the democratic rights of the people ofLanka, including through supporting the UNo
Gibraltar and the Falkland Islands to remain British, investigation into war crimes, which the Primea for as long as that is their wish, and protect ourMinister was instrumental in securing following his¥
Overseas ‘Territorieshistoric visit to Jaffna~ m stand up for the rule of law and human rights inTM actively support Cypriots to find a peaceful and
Zimbabwelasting settlement to reunite their island.
Keeping Britain safe
Our p lan of action: class of seven Astute submarines and buying the Jomt Strike
Fighter, Scout armoured vehicles, ‘Type 26 frigates and
We will protect our nationnew Apache attack helicopters. We will bring both of our new Aircraft Carriers - HMS Queen Elizabeth and HMS
We will continue to keep our Armed Forces strong so theyPrince of Wales, the largest vessels the Royal Navy has ever can continue to keep you safe. We will maintain the sizepossessed - into service, so we have one available for use at of the regular armed services and not reduce the armyall times. We will continue to seek value for money in defence to below 82, OOO. We will retain the ‘Trident continuous atprocurement, recognising the important contribution that sea nuclear deterrent to provide the ultimate guaranteethe UK defence industry makes to our prosperity.
of our safety and build the new fleet of four Successor
Ballistic Missile Submarines - securing thousands of highly-skilled engineering jobs in the UK. We will workWe have the biggest defence closely with our allies to continue to strengthen NATObud g et in the EU -- and the supporting its new multi-national rapid response force..:
We will maintain our global presence, strengthening oursecond biggest in NATO defence partnerships in the Gulf and Asia. Later this year, we will hold a National Security Strategy and Strategic
Defence and Security Review to plan for the future. We will maintain strong, modern Armed
We will maintain a balanced defence budgetForces and give our Armed Forces the equipment they needModern, flexible Armed Forces need strong reserve capacity, alongside strong regular forces. We have invested significantly
We can only have strong, well-funded Armed Forces byin our reserves, and we will deliver on our commitment continuing to build a stronger economy. We have the secondto expand them to 35, OOO. We will continue to invest in largest defence budget in NATO and the largest in the EU. our cyber defence capabilities. We will also provide more
We are meeting NATO’s two targets: that each countryopportunities for talented people from all communities and should spend two per cent of its gross national income onwalks of life to serve their country. We will ensure our Armed defence, and of that spending 2O per cent should go onForces overseas are not subject to persistent human rights major equipment. We have made commitments for theclaims that undermine their ability to do their job.
equipment plan to be funded at one per cent above inflation for the next Parliament. We plan to invest at least £l6OWe will do all we can to honour billion in new military equipment over the next decade: as° well as our six new Type 45 destroyers, we are building ath ose wh O & Ivesom uch
KEEPING OURCOUNTRYSECURE TTTHE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5
We will continue to honour the Armed Forcesworld-class rehabilitation facilities. And we have used
Covenant£45O million of LIBOR fines from banks to support the
Armed Forces community. ‘The money has been used
We have honoured our commitment to enshrine theto support a wide range of charities and good causes,
Armed Forces Covenant in law and done much tofrom providing better play facilities for the children of support our servicemen and women. We have deliveredservice families, to helping rehabilitation through sport for better accommodation for service families, helpedinjured veterans. We pressed for the introduction of the service personnel buy their own home, and ensured thatArctic Star medal - for veterans of the Arctic Convoys children of members of the Armed Forces benefit from-and the Bomber Command Clasp, to ensure proper the Pupil Premium. We have delivered proper mentalrecognition for those who risked their lives to keep us free.
health support and priority access to medical treatmentsWe will build on this proud record, implementing Lord for veterans. ‘To ensure that those who serve can enjoyAshcroft’s recommendations on the way the nation fulfils greater economic security, we have boosted allowancesits obligations to veterans. We will work to address hearing and tax reliefs. We have protected pensions for ourloss among veterans. And we will continue to support servicemen and women. We have ensured that injuredthe unsung heroes of the Armed Forces community: the service personnel have access to the latest prosthetics andpartners and families of those who serve.
Tackling global challenges to make you safer and more prosperous
Our plan of action: By 2O2O, we will save l.4
We will continue to honour our commitmentsmillion children's lives
Tackling global poverty is both the right thing to do and in Britain’s interests. We have delivered on ourto clean water and sanitation, to stop terrible diseases.
promises to meet the UN target of spending O.7 perWe will continue to lead the response to humanitarian cent of national income as aid and to enshrine this inemergencies, and establish a means to respond rapidly law. We will continue to meet the O.7 per cent target, to crises. Our leading role in dealing with the recent maintain an independent Department for Internationaloutbreak of Ebola in West Africa is a good example
Development and keep aid untied. Our aid budgetof how our aid programme helps protect Britain from meets the OECD aid rules, and we will actively engageserious threats, while also helping countries tackle major in international discussions to ensure that these rulesemergencies which put their stability at risk. We will fully reflect the importance of peace, stability andlead a major new global programme to accelerate the effective institutions for reducing poverty. We will insistdevelopment of vaccines and drugs to eliminate the that every government and organisation we fund meetsworld’s deadliest infectious diseases, while investing to global transparency standards. save lives from malaria and working to end preventable child and maternal deaths. We will expand payment by
We will save livesresults and ensure all money to governments is clearly earmarked for specific purposes.
By 2O2O, we will save l.4 million children’s lives, by immunising 76 million children against killer diseases. We will tackle the causes of poverty and
We will help at least ll million children in the poorestpromote gender equality countries gain a decent education, improve nutrition for at least 5O million people, who would otherwise goWe will push for new global goals to eradicate extreme hungry; and help at least 6O million people get accesspoverty by 2O3O and promote human development,
Seae wa) gender equality and good governance. We will workforced marriage, both at home and abroad.5 to prevent climate change and assist the poorest inoe adapting to it. As the route out of poverty is aboutWe will help you fight povertyS much more than just aid, we will boost growth and3 jobs, making it easier for people to start up businessesOur International Citizen Service has given thousandsit and trade freely with each other. We will continue toof young Brits the opportunity to volunteer abroad. Wex promote the golden thread of democracy, the rule ofwill triple it in size. We will also double our successful~ law, property rights, a free media and open, accountableAid Match scheme, which matches donations to institutions. We will promote girls’ education, encouragecharity from the aid budget. We will boost partnerships equal access to property rights and work to achievebetween UK institutions and their counterparts in the access to family planning for everyone who wants it. Wedeveloping world, and help people in the UK give or will continue to lead efforts to tackle violence againstlend money directly to individuals and entrepreneurs women and girls, end FGM and combat early andaround the world.
KEEPING OURCOUNTRYSECURE 7.
» \
I -
°ain 4.~té ’
», f' ‘ 7... TM.: e °..
’., x bd. ‘:
e. «
‘ e a.. e ° Pay LsTHE CONSERVATIVE PARTY MANIFESTO 2Ol5
Conclusion
SO THIS IS OUR DETAILED PLAN FOR BRITAIN.
Our plan to entrench the progress of the past five years. Our plan for you and your family, at every stage of your life.
IT IS UNDERPINNED BY SOME SIMPLE CONSERVATIVE VALUES.
Those who work hard and do the right thing must be rewarded. Everyone should be able to rise as high as their talents and effort will take them. We measure our success not just in how we show our strength abroad, but in how we care for the weakest and most vulnerable at home.
ABOVE ALL, RUNNING THROUGH THIS PLAN
IS A TRUE BELIEF IN BRITAIN.
In the past five years, as so often before in our history, we have once again defied the expectations of the world to rise up and meet our challenges. The British character is renewed every day by the millions who work hard, raise their families, care for those who need help, who do the right thing - and make this country what it is.
THIS MANIFESTO IS ABOUT IMPROVING THE LIVES
OF EACH AND EVERY ONE OF THESE PEOPLE.
Together we have come so far. If we stick to our long-term plan, we can secure a better future for you and your family. So let us keep moving forward; and set our sights on making our great country greater still.
8latt fara iIs» **f
Promoted by Alan Mabbutt on -» I PaiO%