Why the Government believes that voting to remain in the
European Union ts the best decision for the UK.
The EU referendum, Thursday, 23rd June 2Ol6. On Thursday, 23rd June there TheUKhas secured aspecial The Government believes will be a referendum. It’s your - status in a reformed EU: the UK should remain
Ue canara inthe European ° We will not join the euroin the EU.
Union (EU). e we will keep our ownThis leaflet sets out the border controlsfacts, and explains why the
It’s a big decision. One thatGovernment believes a vote will affect you, your familye the UK will not be part ofto remain in the EU is in the and your children for decadesfurther European politicalbest interests of the people of to come. integrationthe UK. It shows some of the e there will be tough newchoices the UK would face if to our welfare system forIf you would like further new EU migrantsinformation, please visit e we have a commitmentthe Government’s EU be mon(Step AO ae; tues(ine ZeeThis is your chance weds l 8 l5 22 29to decide your thus 29 l6(23)3Oown future and fri 2 4O ie Buthe future of the sei 444 46United Kingdom.
é26It is important that olyou voteA stronger economy
The EU is by far the UK’sThe EU’s Single Market hasBeing inside the EU also biggest trading partner. over 5OO million customersmakes it more attractive
EU countries buy 44% ofand an economy over fivefor companies to invest in everything we sell abroad, fromtimes bigger than the Uk’s. the UK, meaning more jobs.
cars to insurance. RemainingThe Single Market makes itOver the last decade, foreign inside the EU guarantees oureasier and cheaper for UKcompanies have invested full access to its Single Market. I companies to sell their£54O billion in the UK,
By contrast, leaving createsproducts outside the UK, equivalent to £l48 million uncertainty and risk. creating jobs as a result. every day.
UK industry and the EU
AerospacellO, OOO47%
Chemicals and pharmaceuticalsl36, OOO54%
Financial servicesl, O69, OOO4l%
Food manufacturing373, OOO53%
IT and telecomsl,364, OOO46%
Transportl, O65, OOO44%»
@ X
~. _ Me I / a& ree wy
/a. 7:.> -: erCost of livingTravel abroadEU membership also gives
If the UK voted to leave theMillions of UK citizens travelon citizens rravenng in one
EU, the resulting economicto Europe each year. The EUuropean fee. toh € rg shock would put pressure onhas made this easier andto lic he: ithe or cneaper the value of the pound, whichcheaper. public healthcare.
would risk higher prices ofEU refin the l99Os hSome argue little would some household goods andresulted in a drop in ‘ares achange if we left the EU. But damage living standards. over 4O% for lower cost flights. there are no aaa
Fcustomers would keep these ce ese ess to ieFrom next year, mobilebenefits if we left.
i ingle fi to Europhone roaming charges will har ak ond Ing to ‘Costebe abolished across the EU, arder and Increase Costs. saving UK customers up to
38p per minute on calls. an: II cn he GS -a
- a \\ arr.. “ I the resultingpA astCUNy. teeconomic shock I".
-! would risk higher I -
Wrices of some te iehousehold goodsWhat happens if we leave?
Voting to leave the EU wouldBut the Government’sA more limited trade deal create years of uncertainty and judgement is that it would bewith the EU would give the potential economic disruption. much harder than that - lessUK less access to the Single
This would reduce investmentthan 8% of EU exports comeMarket than we have now - and cost jobs. to the UK while 44% of UKincluding for services, which
The Government judges it couldexports go to the EU. mee up almost 8O% of ne result in lO years or more ofNo other country hasC nda’s decal vith the EU.
uncertainty as the UK unpicks managed to secure‘lai i te dae; our relationship with the EU and __ significant access to thewil give ‘ithe so far b or renegotiates new arrangements Single Market, withoutServices, It T “the: ki een d with the EU and over 5O otherhaving to: stil rot in force. Ing an countries around the world. e follow EU rules over which:
Some argue that we couldthey have no real say strike a good deal quickly withinto the E the EU because they want to* Pay Into ° “U_ keep access to our market. e accept EU citizens living and working in their country-~
- - " a: a ae~- ¥
Avote to leave could I -atteeee oo-
-_ + ‘‘4aa--- mean a decade or. age: Saas Lear - moriRaaee--_ e of uncertainty, Ve ~eS:4eo +-.4
MECH TMT Hiiee eeVi. Ae
- 5 ©« y: a/ya es
A-.. ‘4 cal:: "ss - re bg >.}.. ' i
Lei //);4> iefi -. Controlling immigration and securing our borders
Securing our bordersworked here for up to fourKeeping us safer
The UK is not part of the EU’syears. The Government wilEU membership means border-free zone - we controlhave greater powers to takeUK police can use law our own borders which givesaction where there is abuseenforcement intelligence from us the right to check everyone, of our immigration system.2/ EU countries, and will have including EU nationals, arriving I Some argue that leavingaccess to fingerprint and DNA from continental Europe. the EU would give us moreinformation.
Immigrationoeee ea aration. EU cooperation makes it make our benefits systemcountries - such as Norway -Arrest Warrant over l, OOO less of a draw for EU citizens. have had to accept the rightsuspects have faced ‘ustice
In future, new EU migrantsof all EU citizens to live andin he courts and ver 7OOO will not have full access towork in their country. have been extradited, certain benefits until they have:4ina
I The UK is not part of the uropean border-free zone. We control our
°own borders e~IThe UK is part of the EU, keep full access to the Singlecountries. It also guarantees a group of 28 countries whichMarket, with a say on itsmany employment rights.
exists to promote economicrules. For every £l paid in tax, The UK as a leading security, peace and stability. a little over lp goes to theforce in the world
The EU operates as a single, EU. The Government judges free trading market, withoutthat what the UK gets backThe UKis a strong, taxes between borders. in opportunities, job creationindependent nation. Our EU
The UK has secured aand economic security fromeee magnifies the; EU membership far outweighs UK's ability to get its way special status in the EU..
the cost. on the issues we care about.
The UK has kept the pound, F;. waeEU action helped prevent will not join the euro and hasOpportunities for youae. Iran from obtaining nuclear kept control of UK borders. and your children.:
Wehd that no UKweapons; and the EU is
© Nave an be t - no dEU membership means youleading the world on tackling to the EU an the ‘tur with 'and your family have the rightclimate change.
° fe du Thy Uk w i, to live, work or study abroad a rererenaum. tnewlin any of the 27 other memberi acaaal cc,.-... a-“Sw
7“xat>tI. a. ae ora'»7 asA once in a generation decision
The referendum on Thursday, This is your decision. TheIf you would like to know
23rd June is your chance toGovernment will implementmore about any of the decide if we should remain inwhat you decide. information in this leaflet, or leave the European Union. If you're aged l8 or over bygo to:
The Government believes it 23rd June and are entitled is in the best interests ofto vote, this is your chance the UK to remain in the EU. to decide.
This is the way to protectRegistration ends on 7th jobs, provide security, andJune. Find out how to register strengthen the UK’s economyat Aboutmyvote. co. uk for every family in this countryand register online at
-aclear path into the future, Gov. uk/registerto-vote in contrast to the uncertainty of leaving.:7
I aes:
wae- re 5 aes ermfThe EU referendum is a
> eeIbig decision for you and
PO ae \your family’s future
The Government believes that voting to remain in the European Union ts the best decision for the UK.
Fal Protecting jobsFa A stronger economy Fal Providing security
The EU referendum is a once in a generation decision. The Government believes it is in you and your family’s best interests that the UK remains in the European Union.
Vote on Thursday, 23rd June 2Ol6.
If you would like further information, please visit the Government’s EU referendum website at