mentite(TER IVERRAING YP UNM PETE TeV PUR ETE AN
T THE FEW FOR THE MANY NOTTHEEF
THE MANY NOTTHE FEW FOR THE AN
THE MANY NOTTHE FEW FOR THE NN
T THE FEW FOR THE MANY NOTTHEFFOR THE MANY
NOT THE FEWCONTENTS
FOREWORD4 l CREATING AN ECONOMY THAT WORKS FOR ALL7
A fair taxation system9
Balancing the bookslO
Infrastructure investmentll
Upgrading our economy:
Labour's industrial strategyl3
Transforming our financial systeml6
A new deal for businessl7
Widening ownership of our economyl9
Sustainable energy2O
2 NEGOTIATING BREXIT23
Immigration28
International trade3O
3 TOWARDS A NATIONAL EDUCATION SERVICE33
Early years35
Schools37
Skills39
Higher Education43
4A FAIR DEAL AT WORK45
Rights at work47
Self-employed workers5l
5 SOCIAL SECURITY53
Dignity for pensioners54
Dignity for those who cannot work56
6 SECURE HOMES FOR ALL59
Home ownership6l
Private renters62
Council and social tenants63
Homelessness647 HEALTHCARE FOR ALL65
NHS66
Towards a National Care Service7l
Mental health73
8 SAFER COMMUNITIES75
Police and crime76
Border security78
Fire and Rescue Services79
Justice8O
Prisons and Probation service82
9 LEADING RICHER LIVES85
Local communities86
Transport9O
Environment93
Animal welfare94
Culture for all95
Media97
Sport99 lO EXTENDING DEMOCRACYlOl
EnglandlO3
ScotlandlO4
WaleslO5
Northern IrelandlO6 ll A MORE EQUAL SOCIETYlO7
WomenlO9
LGBT equalitylll
Diverse communitiesll2
People with disabilitiesll3 l2 A GLOBAL BRITAINll5
Diplomacyll7
Defencel2O
Developmentl22FOREWORD
A big part of being the leader of a political party is that you meet people across the country and hear a wide range of views and ideas about the future. For me, it’s been a reminder that our country is a place of dynamic, generous and creative people with massive potential.
But I've also heard something far lessthe rich getting richer, more children positive, something which motivatesin poverty, our NHS failing and our us in the Labour Party to work forschools and social care in crisis.
the kind of real change set out in thisOr you can vote for the party that manifesto. It is a growing sense ofhas a plan to change all of this - anxiety and frustration. The Labour Party.
Faced with falling living standards, Britain is the fifth richest country growing job insecurity and shrinkingin the world. But that means little public services, people are underwhen many people don’t share in increasing strain. Young people arethat wealth. Many feel the system held back by debt and the cost ofis rigged against them. And this housing. Whole families are beingmanifesto sets out exactly what held back from the life they havecan be done about it.
worked towards. os..
Britain needs to negotiate a Brexit
I'm constantly told of these pressuresdeal that puts our economy and in the workplace. Faced with constantliving standards first. That won't cuts and interference, our police, be achieved by empty slogans and nurses, doctors, teachers and councilposturing. We cannot put at risk staff are held back from deliveringour links with our largest trading the public services they signed up to. partner. Instead we need a jobs-first
Workers are held back by fallingBrexit that allows us to upgrade our.; economy for the 2lst century.
real pay and job security. Our entrepreneurs and managers areLabour will invest in the cutting-edge being held back from growing theirjobs and industries of the future business. If you are increasinglythat can improve everybody's lives.
asked to do more with less, thenWhich is why this manifesto outlines you are not alone. a fully costed programme to upgrade
Every election is a choice. WhatOur economy. From childcare makes this election different is thatto transport, housing to lifelong the choice is starker than ever before. learning, Labour understands how a successful economy depends on
You can choose more of the same:.
services that support us all.
4FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWi<“a
’Jipurlaboyeeoreo4,4.- eoyou. Yi.>- a NOtIe jx. 2aed~A,-_ oar:{AryPA ’ a
< Hou! Ew ‘ >
-- ‘. a
~- ziq ~j a4:’
_-‘
So yes, this election is about whatthe homes we need to rent and sort of country we want to be afterbuy, keeping our communities safe
Brexit. Is it one where the majoritywith more police officers, giving our are held back by the sheer strugglechildren’s schools the funding they of getting by? That isn’t the Britainbadly need, and restoring the NHS
Labour is determined to create. to its place as the envy of the world.
So let's build a fairer Britain whereDon't let the Conservatives hold no one is held back. A country whereBritain back.
body is able to get on in life, t everybe ¥'S anne lO BEE ON ITS, TOLet's build a Britain that works have security at work and at home, tofor the many. not the few be decently paid for the work they do, Ys:
and to live their lives with the dignity they deserve.[fee
Let's build a country where we invest our wealth to give everyone theJeremy Corbyn best chance. That means buildingLeader of the Labour Party6FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWCREATING AN
ECONOMY THAT
WORKS FOR ALLCREATING ANLabour will turn this around.
aWe will upgrade our economy,
ECO N O MY THATbreaking down the barriers that hold atoo many of us back, and tackling
WO RKS FO R ALLthe gender pay gap. Our National aTransformation Fund will deliver,.. the investment that every part of
Labour's economic strategy is_,.; oo. Britain needs to meet its potential, about delivering a fairer, more:; overcoming years of neglect. Our prosperous society for the many,:;.
Findustrial strategy will support not just the few.:.
businesses to create new, highWe will measure our economicskilled, high-paid and secure work success not by the number ofacross the country, in the sectors billionaires, but by the ability of ourof the future such as renewables.
people to live richer lives. We will stop our financial system being rigged for the few, turning the
Labour understands that the creation8 58°&.. power of finance to work for the of wealth is a collective endeavour::
public good. And we will put small between workers, entrepreneurs,.. businesses at the centre of our investors and government. Each;; economic strategy.
contributes and each must share fairly in the rewards. The growth created by our national investment plan, underpinned by the
This manifesto sets out Labour's plan. P: Py. responsible economic management to upgrade our economy and rewritea. oO. embodied in our Fiscal Credibility the rules of a rigged system, so that.:;
Rule, will create good jobs, drive up our economy really works for the_; oe, living standards and improve the many, and not only the few. Britain isa. public finances.
the only major developed economy where earnings have fallen evenIt is a plan that will deliver Labour’s as growth has returned after thevision of an economy that works for financial crisis. Most working peoplethe many, not just the few - a Britain in Britain today are earning less, afterin which no one is held back.
inflation, than they did ten years ago.
Too many of us are in low-paid and insecure work. Too many of us fear our children will not enjoy the same opportunities that we have.
8FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEW7: iUnder Labour's plans, 95 per cent
- <; -of taxpayers will be guaranteed
De Ve Se ~--_SCO€TMsono increase in their income tax. I he-«¢. Icontributions, and everyone will
-- i) ~ % Ca; hosts (mir aN ] be protected from any increase
] *b Ms yy) To in personal National Insurance
Ca] s ‘rycontributions and VAT. Only the
LI, res.» top 5 per cent of earners will be
[ BEyt asked to contribute more in tax to
Taw tf! Ywesi l mas __ help fund our public services. We
HMREASURYrenew our pledge not to extend VAT
7 aaTto food, children’s clothes, books and newspapers, and public
A FAIR TAXATIONtransport fares.
oo Corporation tax in the UK is the
SYSTE Mlowest of any major developed economy. Our new settlement with
Taxation is what underpins ourbusiness will ask large corporations shared prosperity. All of us, to pay a little more while still keeping including business, benefit fromUK corporation tax among the lowest a healthy, educated and skilledof the major developed economies. In population, with access to basicturn, we will meet the business need services and secure housing. for amore skilled workforce with
We believe in the social obligationextra corporate tax revenues while to contribute to a fair taxation schemecontributing to education and. skills budgets.
for the common good. We will take on the social scourge of tax avoidanceWe will protect small businesses by through our Tax Transparency andreintroducing the lower small profits
Enforcement Programme, and closerate of corporation tax. We will also down tax loopholes. exclude small businesses from costly
But we will not ask ordinaryplans to introduce quarterly reporting and take action on late payments.
households to pay more. A Labour government will guarantee no risesLabour will give HM Revenue & in income tax for those earning below - Customs the resources and skills
£8O, OOO a year, and no increasesnecessary to clamp down hard on in personal National Insurancethose unscrupulous few individuals
Contributions or the rate of VAT. and companies who seek to avoid the responsibilities that the rest of us meet.
CHAPTER Ol CREATING AN ECONOMY THAT WORKS FOR ALL9BALANCI NGResponsibility, which we will make aaccountable to Parliament. We will
TH E BOO KSalso consult on implementing the arecommendations of the Kerslake
Our manifesto is fully costed, withReview of the Treasury.
all current spending paid for out of taxation or redirected revenue streams. Our public services must rest on the foundation of sound finances. Labour will therefore set the target of eliminating the government's deficit on dayto-day spending within five years.
But government must have a laserlike focus on how we earn, as well as how we spend. At the same time as eliminating the current deficit, Labour will invest in our future, to ensure faster growth and help us to earn our way as a country again.
To maintain good fiscal health, we will have a firm rule in place to guide all our taxation and spending decisions.
Our Fiscal Credibility Rule is based on the simple principle that government should not be borrowing for day-today spending, but that future growth depends on investment. It was designed in conjunction with worldleading economists. It also means we are committed to ensuring that the national debt is lower at the end of the next Parliament than it is today.
Compliance with the rule will be overseen by a strengthened and truly independent Office for Budget lOFOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWINVESTMENT I I © a
Our country and its peopleioa oll Td45 have been held back by a lackmeg aeye Ele eee of investment in the backbonepeis “ial J of a modern economy - the5]{h- OohaTe infrastructure of transport,))Ss ew fretTer communications and energy-eae XN f a‘ systems. And when investmentI; nL - has happened, it has been toow,’iom concentrated in too few places.
Labour will make different choices. into Scotland, consulting with (and,
We will take advantage of near-where necessary, compensating) record low interest rates to createcommunities. We will link HS2 with a National Transformation Fundother rail investments, such as that will invest £25O billion over tenCrossrail of the North (tying together years in upgrading our economy. our great northern cities) and on to
We will ensure that the hugethe Durham Freight Centre. We will potential of every part of our countrybuild a new Brighton Main Line for is met. The next Labour governmentthe South East.
will rebuild communities ripped apart; aIn London, to ensure our capital by globalisation and neglected for;;... continues to prosper, we will build years by government. We will rebuild;
Crossrail 2.
and transform our economy so that it works for the many, not the few. To harness the economic potential
So we will put in place tight rulesof new technologies and science, to ensure that investment is fairlywe will complete the Science Vale shared around every region andtransport arc, from Oxford to nation of the UK. We will tearCambridge through Milton Keynes.
down the barriers that have held... tas
And we will deliver rail electrification too many people back..
and expansion across the whole
A Labour government will completecountry, including Wales and the the HS2 high-speed rail line fromSouth West.
London through Birmingham to
Leeds and Manchester, and then
CHAPTER Ol CREATING AN ECONOMY THAT WORKS FOR ALLllWe will transform our energy systems, investing in new, stateof-the-art low-carbon gas and renewable electricity production.
We will deliver universal superfast broadband availability by 2O22.
Labour will improve mobile internet coverage and expand provision of free public wifi in city centres and on public transport. We will improve
AG coverage and invest to ensure all urban areas, as well as major roads and railways, have uninterrupted
5G coverage. On day one we will instruct the National Infrastructure
Commission to report on how to roll out ‘ultrafast’ (3OOMbps) across the
UK within the next decade.
l2FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWU PG RADI N GEast. And while the South East astruggles with a rising cost of living
OUR ECO N O MY: crisis, many northern and coastal atowns have watched as their
LABO U R’Seconomies and communities are left abehind. Britain's failure to get all its
IND USTRIALregional and local economies working acan be seen in the deterioration
ST RATEGYof the country's current account, aweak productivity growth and.. underinvestment in infrastructure.
Our economy is suffering from years of neglect by governmentsBritain can only be stronger if every that have refused to supportnation and region is given the our industries, businesses andresources and support to succeed.
workers. This wasted potentialOnly a Labour government with is holding us all back. Inequalitya credible industrial strategy can has ballooned as the economyreach this untapped potential and has shifted towards low-paid, deliver prosperity to every corner insecure jobs. of our country, working with os; devolved administrations.
Britain’s manufacturing base has declined and we have relied tooOur industrial strategy will be built heavily on the financial sector, on objective, measurable missions centred on London and the Southdesigned to address the great
CHAPTER Ol CREATING AN ECONOMY THAT WORKS FOR ALLl3challenges of our times. In meeting* Procurement - by requiring the these challenges, we will movebest standards on government beyond the narrow approaches ofcontracts.
the past, and mobilise the talents and
* Research and development - resources of our whole country to_.. by committing extra research deliver an economy fit for the future..
investment.
The first missions set by a Labour;.* Energy costs and security - by government will be to:-: an capping costs and investing in new l. ensure that 6O per cent of the UK'spublicly owned energy provision.
energy comes from zero-carbon..:.
While our industrial strategy is one or renewable sources by 2O3O for growth across all sectors, Labour
2. create an innovation nation withrecognises that certain sectors are the highest proportion of highof strategic significance to the UK skilled jobs in the Organisationeconomy. For each strategic industry, for Economic Cooperation andthe next Labour government will
Development by 2O3O. We willestablish a council (modelled on meet the OECD target of 3 per centthe highly successful Automotive of GDP spent on researchCouncil) to oversee its future security and development by 2O3O. and growth. We will also encourage rivate investment by removing new
In order to create a fertile ground forP: y8.._plant and machinery from business businesses to achieve these missions:.. rate calculations.
Labour will take action across the areas we know are necessary forNational and local government spends business and industry to grow:£2OO billion a year in the privatesector procurement. Labour will put
+ Skills - by creating a NationalP; P.; that spending power to good use to
Education Service for England.
upgrade our economy, create good
+ Infrastructure - by investing £25Olocal jobs and reduce inequality. We will billion over the next ten years. require firms supplying national or local overnment to meet the high standards
* UK supply chains - by targeting66 we should expect of all businesses:
government support where there:._ are gapspaying their taxes, recognising trade
Babs. unions, respecting workers’ rights and
* Trade - by negotiating a new dealequal opportunities, protecting the with Europe that puts jobs and theenvironment, providing training, and economy first. paying suppliers on time. We will expect l4FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWsuppliers to reduce boardroom pay excesses by moving towards a 2O: l gap between the highest and lowest paid.
We will appoint a Digital Ambassador to liaise with technology companies to promote Britain as an attractive place for investment and provide support for start-ups to scale up to become world-class digital businesses. Our Digital Ambassador will help to ensure businesses are ready to grow and prosper in the digital age.
CHAPTER Ol CREATING AN ECONOMY THAT WORKS FOR ALLl5TRAN S FO RM I N GLabour will overhaul the regulation oeof our financial system, putting in
OU R Fl NAN CIALplace a firm ring-fence between ainvestment and retail banking that
SYSTE Mwill protect consumers. We will atake a new approach to the ublicly-owned RBS, and launch
A decade after the devastatingPy.:.; a consultation on breaking up the international financial crisis, our:....; bank to create new local public financial system is still holding banks that are better matched back too many of our small;... to their customers’ needs. And we will businesses and local economies.
extend existing Stamp Duty Reserve
Labour will transform how ourTax to cover a wider range of assets, financial system operates. Followingensuring that the public gets a fairer the successful example of Germanyshare of financial system profits.
and the Nordic countries, we will... Labour will change the law so that establish a National Investment; ie. banks can't close a branch where
Bank that will bring in private capital.;.. a: there is a clear local need, putting finance to deliver £25O billion of:. a. their customers first. Britain has lending power.. F.
a successful international finance
This new public institution willindustry, but we also need a strong, support a network of regionalsafe and socially useful banking development banks that, unlike giantsystem to meet the needs of our
City of London firms, will be dedicatedown regional economies and to supporting inclusive growth in theircommunities. We will commit to communities. The banks will delivercreating a more diverse banking the finance that our small businesses, system, backed up by legislation.
cooperatives and innovative projects need across the whole country.
The National Investment Bank will fill existing gaps in lending by private banks, particularly to small businesses, and by providing patient, long-term finance to R&Dintensive investments. It will also be given the task of helping to deliver our industrial strategy, by prioritising spending in line with its objectives.
l6FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWThe majority of businesses playi ) by the rules: they pay their taxesie and their workers reasonably andFr \ fe on time, and they operate with, \ respect for the environment and\ pee local communities. That is why it ishx ee vital that government ensures that~ businesses doing the right thingce are rewarded rather than undercutNy es or outbid by those unscrupulous few that cut corners, whether.; woeduty directly not only shareholders, on taxes, workers’ conditions,. but to employees, customers, the environmental standards, or.;:. environment and the wider public, consumer safety and protection...
and we will consult on bringing
But our business culture doesn’tforward appropriate legislation always work like this. Scandals such aswithin this Parliament.
the failure of BHS show how the long-.
Labour will amend the takeover term growth of a company can be.;
-. regime to ensure that businesses sacrificed for the sake of a quick buck.. i..
identified as being ‘systemically
When shareholders are lookingimportant’ have a clear plan in place for quick short-term returns, theyto protect workers and pensioners encourage companies to cut corners. when a company is taken over.
That means they look to cut wages, Labour will also legislate to reduce instead of investing for the long term, pay inequality by introducing an or they spend longer inventing newExcessive Pay Levy on companies tax avoidance schemes than theywith staff on very high pay.
do inventing new products.
8POur small and medium-sized
By reforming the rules our companiesenterprises (SMEs) are the backbone operate under, we can make sureof our economy, providing 6O they stay focused on deliveringper cent of private-sector jobs.
shared wealth. Labour will amendTechnological changes, like the company law so that directors owe aspread of digital manufacturing and
CHAPTER Ol CREATING AN ECONOMY THAT WORKS FOR ALLl7rapid communication, mean smaller,* Declare war on late payments by:
faster businesses will be the future of.
* Using government procurement our economy. oa to ensure that anyone bidding
Yet this Conservative Governmentfor a government contract pays has taken small businesses forits own suppliers within 3O days.
granted. Labour is the party of small...* Developing a version of the businesses. We understand the. ao. Australian system of binding challenges our smaller businessesan.; arbitration and fines for face. In order to provide the support;. persistent late-payers for the many small businesses need,::; private and public sectors.
a Labour government will:
We will also bring forward legislation
* Mandate the new National8. &:; to create a proper legal definition for
Investment Bank, and regional:... cooperative ownership. The National development banks in every..;; Investment Bank and regional region, to identify where other:. development banks will be charged lenders fail to meet the needsth helpitti with helping support our cooperative of SMEs and prioritise lending toping PP. P.. sector. Labour will aim to double the improve the funding gap size of the cooperative sector in the
* Reinstate the lower small-businessUK, putting it on a par with those in corporation tax rate. leading economies like Germany or the US.
* Introduce a package of reforms to business rates - including switching from RPI to CPI indexation, exempting new investment in plant and machinery from valuations, and ensuring that businesses have access to a proper appeals process - while reviewing the entire business rates system in the longer run.
* Scrap quarterly reporting for businesses with a turnover of under £85, OOO.
l8FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWWI DEN I N Gparcel charges, and failed to meet aits customer service obligations,
OWN E RS H I Pp O Fwhile its owners trade shares at asignificant profit. The Conservative
OUR ECO N O MYGovernment's privatisation of Royal aMail was a historic mistake, selling off another national asset on the cheap.
Britain is a long-establishedP democracy. But the distributionAcross the world, countries are of ownership of the country’staking public utilities back into economy means that decisionspublic ownership. Labour will about our economy are oftenlearn from these experiences and made by a narrow elite. Morebring key utilities back into public democratic ownership structuresownership to deliver lower prices, would help our economy delivermore accountability and a more for the many and lead to a fairersustainable economy. We will:
distribution of wealth
+ Bring private rail companies
In government, Labour would giveback into public ownership more people a stake - and a sayas their franchises expire.
- in our economy by doubling the;.;* Regain control of energy supply size of the cooperative sector and:;. osh. networks through the alteration introducing a “right to own,” making.-; of operator license conditions, employees the buyer of first refusal.:. and transition to a publicly owned, when the company they work for is;.7, decentralised energy system.
up for sale. We will act to ‘insource our public and local council services* Replace our dysfunctional water as preferred providers. system with a network of regional ublicly-owned water companies.
Many basic goods and services havePyP been taken out of democratic control* Reverse the privatisation of Royal through privatisation. This has oftenMail at the earliest opportunity.
led to higher prices and poorer. 8 P; PPublic ownership will benefit quality, as prices are raised to pay;; aconsumers, ensuring that their out dividends. For example, water..... interests are put first and that bills have increased 4O per cent since:..
ae. there is democratic accountability privatisation, and our private energy.; for the service.
providers overcharged customers by
£2 billion in 2Ol5. In private hands,
Royal Mail has increased stamp and
CHAPTER Ol CREATING AN ECONOMY THAT WORKS FOR ALLl9SU STAI NAB L Ehousehold energy bill remains below £l, OOO per year, while we
ENE RGYtransition to a fairer system afor bill payers.
Labour's energy policy is built* Take energy back into public on three simple principles: ownership to deliver renewable
* To ensure security of energyenergy, affordability for.
supply and ‘keep the lights on’. consumers, and democratic control. We will do this in the
* To ensure energy costs arefollowing stages:
affordable for consumers and.
businesses.* Regaining control of energy supply networks through the
* To ensure we meet our climatealteration of the National and change targets and transitionRegional Network Operator to a low-carbon economy. license conditions.
The UK energy system is* Supporting the creation outdated, expensive and polluting. of publicly owned, locally
Privatisation has failed toaccountable energy companies deliver an energy system thatand cooperatives to rival delivers for people, businesses orexisting private energy suppliers, our environment. with at least one if every region.
One in ten households are in* Legislating to permit publicly fuel poverty, yet the Competitionowned local companies to
Markets Authority found customerspurchase the regional grid are overcharged an enormousinfrastructure, and to ensure
£2 billion every year. that national and regional grid
Labour understands that manyinfrastructure is brought into;: public ownership over time.
people don't have time to shop around, they just want reliableLabour will insulate four million and affordable energy. So the nexthomes as an infrastructure priority to
Labour Government will: help those who suffer in cold homes.. each winter. This will cut emissions,
* Introduce an immediate.:
emergency price cap to ensureimprove health, save on bills, and reduce fuel poverty and winter deaths.
that the average dual-fuel
2OFOR THE MANY NOT THE FEW7*l
Homeowners will be offered interest-focused on protecting vital North free loans to improve their property. Sea assets, and the jobs and skills
For renters, Labour will improve onthat depend on them.
existing Landlord Energy Efficienc.
gByyWe are committed to renewable regulations and reestablish the.;_.; energy projects, including tidal
Landlord Energy Saving Allowance; lagoons, which can help create to encourage the uptake of;;. manufacturing and energy jobs efficiency measures. ae:
as well as contributing to climateLabour will ban fracking becausechange commitments.
it would lock us into an ener. ByThe UK has the world’s oldest nuclear infrastructure based on fossil fuels,.;.
i. industry, and nuclear will continue to long after the point in 2O3O when the.. be part of the UK energy supply. We
Committee on Climate Change says;.;; will support further nuclear projects gas in the UK must sharply decline.7 and protect nuclear workers’ jobs
Emerging technologies such asand pensions. There are considerable carbon capture and storage will helpopportunities for nuclear power and to smooth the transition to cleanerdecommissioning both internationally fuels and to protect existing jobsand domestically.
as part of the future energy mix. Toaon
PByBuilding a clean economy of the safeguard the offshore oil and gas:;; industry, we will provide a stratefuture is the most important thing yPbywe must do for our children,
CHAPTER Ol CREATING AN ECONOMY THAT WORKS FOR ALL2lour grandchildren and future generations. Yet recent years have seen a failure to progress towards our targets. A Labour government will put us back on track to meet the targets in the Climate Change Act and the Paris Agreement.
The low-carbon economy is one of the UK's fastest-growing sectors, creating jobs and providing investment across each region.
It employed an estimated 447, OOO employees in the UK in 2Ol5 and saw over £77 billion in turnover.
With backing from a Labour government, these sectors can secure crucial shares of global export markets.
Currently, the UK buys and sells energy tariff free from Europe, an arrangement which saves families and businesses money, and helps balance the power grid. As part of the Brexit negotiations, Labour will prioritise maintaining access to the internal energy market.
Labour will also retain access to
Euratom, to allow continued trade of fissile material, with access and collaboration over research vital to our nuclear industry.
22FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWNEGOTIATING BREXITNEGOTIATINGto our society: they are part of our asociety. And they should not be used
BREXITas bargaining chips.
It is shameful that the Prime
Labour accepts the referendumMinister rejected repeated attempts result and a Labour governmentby Labour to resolve this issue before will put the national interest first. Article 5O was triggered. As a result
We will prioritise jobs and livingthree million EU nationals have standards, build a close newsuffered unnecessary uncertainty, relationship with the EU, protectas have the l.2 million UK citizens workers’ rights and environmentalliving in the EU.
standards, provide certainty. oo,.; A Conservative Brexit will weaken to EU nationals and givei;. workers’ rights, deregulate the a meaningful role to Parliament oo. economy, slash corporate taxes, throughout negotiations. a.:.
sideline Parliament and democratic
We will end Theresa May's recklessaccountability, and cut Britain off approach to Brexit, and seek to unitefrom our closest allies and most the country around a Brexit deal thatimportant trading partners.
works for every community in Britain...
Labour recognises that leaving the
We will scrap the Conservatives’EU with ‘no deal’ is the worst possible
Brexit White Paper and replace itdeal for Britain and that it would do with fresh negotiating priorities thatdamage to our economy and trade.
have a strong emphasis on retainingWe will reject ‘no deal’ as a viable the benefits of the Single Marketoption and if needs be negotiate and the Customs Union - whichtransitional arrangements to avoid are essential for maintaininga ‘cliff-edge’ for the UK economy.
industries, jobs and businesses in..
os.. The issues that affect our continent
Britain. Labour will always put jobs;:;; now will continue to do so in the and the economy first../ future - and Labour will continue
A Labour government willto work constructively with the immediately guarantee existingEU and other European nations rights for all EU nationals living inon issues such as climate change,
Britain and secure reciprocal rightsrefugee crises and counter-terrorism.
for UK citizens who have chosenWe will build a close cooperative to make their lives in EU countries. future relationship with the EU,
EU nationals do not just contributenot as members but as partners.
24FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWee ee eeSL Tog
A Labour government will ensureaccess allowing British farmers and that the UK maintains our leadingfood producers to continue to sell research role by seeking to stay parttheir products on the Continent.
of Horizon 2O2O and its successor.; Labour will also protect our farmers programmes and by welcomingand rural economy by ensurin research staff to the UK. We will: y bY. § i,; Britain continues to set the highest seek to maintain membership of.:..;. standards in food quality and welfare.
(or equivalent relationships with):.
a.. We will not allow Brexit to be used as
European organisations which offer. an excuse to undercut our farmers benefits to the UK such as EuratomLo, oo,
_and flood Britain’s food chain with and the European Medicines Agency..;;. cheap and inferior produce.
We will seek to ensure that Britain remains part of the Erasmus schemeWe will drop the Conservatives’ so that British students have theGreat Repeal Bill, replacing it same educational opportunities afterwith an EU Rights and Protections we leave the EU. Bill that will ensure there is no detrimental change to workers’
The EU is the UK's single largest.:§.. jrights, equality law, consumer trading partner in agricultural...._rights or environmental protections produce, with the vast majority; ue. as a result of Brexit.
of British exports being sold to
European markets. A LabourThroughout the Brexit process, government will end the uncertaintywe will make sure that all EUderived for our farmers and food producerslaws that are of benefit - including by securing continued EU marketworkplace laws, consumer rights and environmental protections - are
CHAPTER O2 NEGOTIATING BREXIT25A ssI sal; fully protected without qualifications, A Labour government will never limitations or sunset clauses. We willconsider these rights a burden work with trade unions, businessesor accept the weakening of and stakeholders to ensure thereworkers’ rights, consumer rights is a consensus on this vital issue. or environmental protections.
A Labour approach to Brexit willanea. We will introduce legislation to ensure there can be no rolling back.... ensure there are no gaps in national of key rights and protections anditd criminal justi security and criminal justice that the UK does not lag behind¥J... arrangements as a result of Brexit.
Europe in workplace protections and environmental standards in future. Labour recognises the vital role that cross-border agencies such as
The EU has had a huge impact in;8.. Eurojust and Europol have played securing workplace protections and.; a; in making Britain safer and that environmental safeguards. But we. European Arrest Warrants have been all know that for many Brexiteers.;.. invaluable. A Labour government will in the Tory Party, this was why..
seek to retain membership of these they wanted to Leave - to tear up... agencies and continue European regulations and weaken hard-fought.. Arrest Warrant arrangements.
rights and protections. Labour will seek a Brexit deal thatgovernment can continue to delivers for all regions and nationscreate jobs and prosperity in of the UK. We will introduce athe years to come.
‘presumption of devolution’ where
Where Theresa May wants to shut devolved powers transferred.;; down scrutiny and challenge, Labour from the EU will go straight to the.‘.:.. will welcome it. We will work with relevant region or nation. For many. oo,
Parliament, not against it.
people and for much of our country,. nan. On an issue of this importance power can feel just as remote andLs.. the Government can't hide from unaccountable in Westminster as.:.. the public or Parliament.
it does in Brussels. So a Labour government will seek to put powersA Labour approach to Brexit also as close to communities as possible. means legislating to guarantee that
Parliament has a truly meaningful
We will ensure there is no drop; y§.; vote on the final Brexit deal.
in EU Structural Funding as a result of Brexit until the end of the current
EU funding round in 2Ol9/2O. As part of Labour's plans to rebalance and rebuild the economy, we will ensure that no region or nation of the UK is affected by the withdrawal of EU funding for the remainder of this
Parliament. This will also apply to the funding of peace and reconciliation projects in Northern Ireland.
We will also improve engagement and dialogue with the devolved administrations and seek to ensure the final Brexit deal addresses specific concerns. In particular
Labour will ensure there is no return to a hard border between Northern
Ireland and the Republic of Ireland and that there is no change in the status or sovereignty of Gibraltar.
We will also protect Gibraltar’s economy and ensure that its
CHAPTER O2 NEGOTIATING BREXIT27I M M IG RATI O NWorking together we will institute a anew system which is based on our. economic needs, balancing controls
Labour offers fair rules and..8.
and existing entitlements. This may reasonable management of:... oeinclude employer sponsorship, work migration. In trade negotiationsoo;.
Loepermits, visa regulations or a tailored our priorities favour growth,::.. mix of all these which works for the jobs and prosperity. We make no... many, not the few.
apologies for putting these aims before bogus immigration targets. Labour will protect those already. working here, whatever their
Freedom of movement will.:.
ethnicity. Our National Education end when we leave the European:..:; bot tsService will raise the level of skills
Union. Britain’s immigration system.;... and training. We will take decisive will change, but Labour will not:.; actions to end the exploitation of scapegoat migrants nor blame.; onsmigrant labour undercutting them for economic failures.;_.
workers’ pay and conditions.
Labour will develop and implement eePPLabour will crack down on fair immigration rules. We will not.
oo, unscrupulous employers. We will discriminate between people of... stop overseas-only recruitment different races or creeds. We will:. _. practices, strengthen safety-atend indefinite detentions and..:
oo,. work inspections and increase distinguish between migrant labour:..; prosecutions of employers evading and family attachment and will_. the minimum wage.
continue to support the work of the Forced Marriage Unit. We willWorking with trade unions, we replace income thresholds with awill end workplace exploitation.
prohibition on recourse to public;. Labour values the economic and funds. New rules will be equally; oo.:.,. social contributions of immigrants.
informed by negotiations with the::.. Both public and private sector
EU and other partners, including:.
employers depend on immigrants.
the Commonwealth..:
We will not denigrate those workers.
Whatever our trade arrangements, We value their contributions, we will need new migrationincluding their tax contributions.
management systems, transparentee
‘.. For areas where immigration and fair to everybody. Working with,;... has placed a strain on public services businesses, trade unions, devolved...;. we will reinstate the Migrant Impact governments and others to identify on. Fund and boost specific labour and skill shortages.
28FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWit with a contributory element from the investments required for High
Net Worth Individual Visas. Labour will restore the rights of migrant domestic workers, and end this form of modern slavery.
Labour will ease the underlying pressures in any areas struggling to cope with seven years of austerity by our programme of investments.
We will not cut public services and pretend the cuts are a consequence of immigration.
Refugees are not migrants. They have been forced from their homes, by war, famine or other disasters.
Unlike the Tories, we will uphold the proud British tradition of honouring the spirit of international law and our moral obligations by taking our fair share of refugees. The current arrangements for housing and dispersing refugees are not fit for purpose. They are not fair to refugees or to our communities. We will review these arrangements.
Labour welcomes international students who benefit and strengthen our education sector, generating more than £25 billion for the British economy and significantly boosting regional jobs and local businesses.
They are not permanent residents and we will not include them in immigration numbers, but we will crack down on fake colleges.
CHAPTER O2 NEGOTIATING BREXIT29INTERNATIONAL _ ict52nsbish standards.
aWe will ensure all future trade
TRAD Edeals safeguard the right to aregulate in the public interest and to protect public services.
Labour is pro-trade andPP pro-investment. The UK’s futureLabour is committed to the prosperity depends on minimisingrules-based international tariff and non-tariff barriers thattrading system of the World Trade prevent us from exporting andOrganisation (WTO). We will rejoin creating the jobs and economicthe Government Procurement growth we need. Agreement, whilst safeguarding the capacity for public bodies to
A Labour government will workpacityP....; make procurement decisions in with devolved administrations tokeeping with public policy objectives bring forward an integrated tradePingPpaicy O%):
and industrial strategy that boostsLabour will build human rights exports, investment and decent jobsand social justice into trade policy.
in Britain. We will ensure that trade agreements; oe, cannot undermine human rights and
Labour will set out our priorities in.. labour standards, and that UK Export an International Trade White Paper;::. Finance support is not available to to lead a national debate on thecompanies engaged in bribery or future of Britain’s trade policy. WeP8 8y. corrupt practices.
will ensure proper transparency and parliamentary scrutiny of all futureWe will work with other WTO trade and investment deals. members to end the dumping of state-subsidised goods on
The EU accounts for 44 per cent§;. our markets. The Conservatives of our current exports and will:;.. consistently blocked EU efforts to continue to be a priority trading;.;;. respond to such dumping with the partner. As our trading relationship:_.; eoduties needed to defend the British with the EU changes it is vital that:;.: steel industry. Labour will develop we retain unrestricted access for.; the full range of trade remedies our goods and services.
necessary to support key sectors
Through our Just Trading initiativeaffected by these unfair practices.
launched in 2Ol6, Labour will work.... Labour will champion the export with global trading partners to;.;;; interests of SMEs, ensuring all develop ‘bestin-class’ free trade and.. new trade agreements include a investment agreements that remove;.;; commitment to support their market trade barriers and promote skilled:
access needs. We will develop an
3OFOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWAs part of our commitment to a
J. low-carbon future, we will actively support international negotiations a fttowards an Environmental Goods aAgreement at the WTO. Labour will use trade negotiations to boost market access for British he’Ienvironmental goods and services, alongside support for investment into new green technologies and innovative low-carbon products.
Labour will develop capital investment schemes and other.. incentives to encourage investment export incentive scheme for SMEs:: g
F:. into the UK, especially into target based on international best practice,. io:- aareas identified by the industrial and we will ring-fence Tradeshow::
strategy. We will champion the UK
Access Programme grants to help.; as a Safe investment environment.
SMEs reach new customers around the world. Labour will review our historic. investment treaties with other
Labour will use the full range of.;.
on. countries, ensuring they are fit for export credit, finance, insurance. purpose for the 2lst century. Labour and trade promotion tools to boost; us. opposes parallel investor-state
British exports and support priority. oe.; dispute systems for multinational industrial sectors.:.
corporations and we will open a
We will create a network of regionaldialogue with trading partners trade and investment championson alternative options that to promote the export andprovide investor protection whilst investment interests of businessesguaranteeing equality before the law.
across the country, and we will include regional representation on overseas trade missions.
Labour is committed to growing the digital economy and ensuring that trade agreements do not impede cross-border data flows, whilst maintaining strong data protection rules to protect personal privacy.
CHAPTER O2 NEGOTIATING BREXIT3l32FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWTOWARDS
A NATIONAL
EDUCATION SERVICETOWARDSWhen the l945 Labour government aestablished the NHS, it created one
A NATI O NALof the central institutions of fairness aof the 2Oth century. The NES will do
EDUCATIONthe same for the 2lst, giving people aconfidence and hope by making
S E RVI C Eeducation a right, not a privilege, aand building bridges where the. Conservatives build barriers.
Education is what empowers us all to realise our full potential.
When it fails, it isn’t just the individual that is held back, but all of us. When we invest in people to develop their skills and capabilities, we all benefit from a stronger economy and society.
At a time when working lives and the skills our economy needs are changing rapidly, governments have the responsibility to make lifelong learning a reality by giving everyone the opportunity to access education throughout their lives.
To meet this responsibility, Labour will create a unified National
Education Service (NES) for England to move towards cradleto-grave learning that is free at the point of use. The NES will be built on the principle that ‘Every Child - and Adult
- Matters’ and will incorporate all forms of education, from early years through to adult education.
34FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEW*FSUnder the Conservatives, the free ue, 4 i: hours entitlement is chronically aR 4 iswunder-funded, with provision patchy é. and hard to navigate. Many providers anow simply refuse to participate in; aly”e scheme. The result is that many
-, parents aren't even getting the: yye; hours they're entitled to.
i oe \ae fisLabour would:
-: l. Overhaul the existing childcare
-Saee--system in which subsidies are given directly to parents who often
EAR LY YEA RSstruggle to use them, and transition ato asystem of high-quality childcare. places in mixed environments with
Currently, there is a gap between.:. direct government subsidy.
the end of maternity leave and the beginning of full-time schooling.2. Maintain current commitments
This gap can make it difficult foron free hours and make significant parents, particularly women, capital investment during our to return to work, unless theyfirst two years of government, have access to informal childcareto ensure that the places exist support. There is also extensiveto meet demand.
evidence that early years. ad;3. Phase in subsidised provision education has a major impact;. on top of free-hour entitlements, on child development, and that... to ensure that everyone has access time in a formal education setting... to affordable childcare, no matter for young children can improvetheir working pattern performance at GCSE and beyond.&P:
4. Transition to a qualified,
Labour would seek to roll outq. graduate-led workforce, by educational provision for early.:... increasing staff wages and enhancing years children as part of a National_.-... training opportunities. This will
Education Service that is truly.
benefit staff, who are among our cradleto-grave.:
worst-paid workers,
Labour introduced free childcareand improve child development.
hours for parents, which were fully funded and resourced.
CHAPTER O3 TOWARDS A NATIONAL EDUCATION SERVICE355. Extend the 3O free hours to all twoyear-olds, and move towards making some childcare available for oneyear-olds and extending maternity pay to l2 months.
Sure Start, and the support it gives to vulnerable and hardto-reach parents, was one of the great achievements of the previous
Labour government, but under the Conservatives l,2OO Sure Start centres have been lost. Labour will halt the closures and increase the amount of money available for
Sure Start.
36FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEW4, >. <Ea *5 s aw yaI»2 &4l
‘¥tShaa; bfe i ei”e 6; bes
SCHOOLSl. Investment - we will make sure aschools are properly resourced.. by reversing the Conservatives’ cuts
Conservative cuts are starving.. and ensuring that all schools have schools of the funding they.
I. the resources they need. We will need to deliver a first class.... oo. introduce a fairer funding formula education. Crippling underfunding.-_. that leaves no school worse off, is driving up class sizes and.;.:. while redressing the historical forcing schools to cut corners.:.. underfunding of certain schools.
A narrow curriculum and a culture...
oeLabour will also invest in new school of assessment is driving away.:.. buildings, including the phased teachers, creating a recruitment... removal of asbestos from existing and retention crisis.
schools.
Labour will not waste money on; ae ar2. Quality - we will drive up standards inefficient free schools and the:, across the board, learning from
Conservatives’ grammar schools..; examples of best practice, such as vanity project. Labour does not want;
Labour's London Challenge, a return to secondary moderns. We.. to encourage cooperation and will also oppose any attempt to force.; strong leadership across schools. We schools to become academies..
and trust in teachers and support
Labour's schools policy will be builtstaff professionalism to refocus their on the following four foundations: workload on what happens in the classroom.
CHAPTER O3 TOWARDS A NATIONAL EDUCATION SERVICE373. Accountability - Labour will ensureeducation systems use more that all schools are democraticallycontinuous assessment, which accountable, including appropriateavoids ‘teaching for the test’.
controls to see that they serve..
_.; We will tackle the teacher recruitment the public interest and their local...
a.. and retention crisis by ending communities. We will require.. wo. the public-sector pay cap, giving joinedup admissions policies across.... teachers more direct involvement in local schools to enable councils to::.
oeots:. the curriculum, and tackling rising fulfil their responsibilities on child. oo lacesworkloads by reducing monitoring
Pe. and bureaucracy.
to simplify the admissions process for parents and to ensure that noWe will also consult on introducing child slips through the net. teacher sabbaticals and placements with industry to encourage
4. Inclusion - Every child is unique, and:: y8.. interaction between education a Labour-led education.:.. and industry and introduce broad system will enable each to find.... experiences into the classroom.
their learning path through a wide choice of courses andWe will reintroduce the Schools qualifications. We will invest inSupport Staff Negotiating Body and measures to close the attainmentnational pay settlements for teachers.
gap between children from different. a.
We will put £l5O million back into backgrounds supporting our children in schools
To give all children the best start inby scrapping the Conservatives’ life, we will reduce class sizes to lessnonsensical plans for schools than 3O for all five-, six-, and sevento pay the apprenticeship levy.
ear-olds, and seek to extend that.
yWe will extend schools-based as resources allow.;.
counselling to all schools to improve
To aid attainment, we will introducechildren’s mental health, at a cost free school meals for all primaryof £9O million per year.
school children, paid for by removin..
P; y8And we will deliver a strategy for the VAT exemption on private;;;° children with special educational school fees. wage needs and disabilities (SEND) based
We will abandon plans to reintroduceon inclusivity, and embed SEND baseline assessments and launchmore substantially into training for a commission to look into curriculumteachers and non-teaching staff, so and assessment, starting bythat staff, children and their parents reviewing Key Stage l and 2 SATs. are properly supported.
The world’s most successful
38FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEW:
At a time when technology isay *: IBs changing demand for differentkinds - of skills, and evolving patterns of work mean that people are more, likely to pursue several careers during their working lives, it is crucial that our education system enables people to upskill and retrain
P; P: POur skills and training sector over their lifetimes. As part of our
_.. has been held back by repeated dynamic industrial strategy, lifelongoo.::
_.._reorganisation, which deprives training will deliver productivity and;. providers, learners and employers growth to the whole economy while... reof the consistency they need to transforming the lives of individuals:
weeassess quality. Labour would and communities..
abandon Conservative plans to once
To ensure that we deliver for everyagain reinvent the wheel by building part of the UK, we will devolvenew technical colleges, redirecting responsibility for skills, wherever therethe money to increase teacher is an appetite, to city regionsnumbers in the FE sector.
or devolved administrations.
We share the broad aims of the
Sainsbury Review but would ensure vocational routes incorporate the
Further and Adult Education. Pa service sector as well as traditional
Despite claiming to be committed tomanufacturing, working in tandem delivering high-quality training, thewith our broad industrial strategy
Conservatives have ruthlessly cutto deliver for the whole economy.
funding for FE colleges - our maina... We will improve careers advice provider of adult and vocational;. and open up a range of routes education - and reduced entitlements:.. through, and back into, education, for adult learners. This has led to_ anstriking a balance between classroom diminishing numbers of courses and..
and onthe-job training, to ensure students, and plunged the sector:.:. students gain both technical and into crisis..
soft skills.
Labour would introduce free, lifelong..
_; To implement the Sainsbury education in Further Education (FE).;. recommendations, we would correct colleges, enabling everyone to upskill.. aanhistoric neglect of the FE sector by or retrain at any point in life.
CHAPTER O3 TOWARDS A NATIONAL EDUCATION SERVICE39giving the sector the investment - in+ Increase capital investment to teachers and facilities - it deserves toequip colleges to deliver Tlevels become a world-leading provider ofand an official pre-apprenticeship adult and vocational education. trainee programme.
More specifically, we would:
* Bring funding for l6 tol8-year-olds Apprenticeships in line with Key Stage 4 baselines, oo,..; Employer-led training is the most while ensuring that the budget is;.
a; effective way of meeting our distributed fairly between colleges::. growing skills gap. Labour supports and school sixth forms.;:
the apprenticeship levy, but will
* Restore the Educationtake steps to ensure that every
Maintenance Allowance forapprenticeship is of a high quality.
l6 to l8year-olds from lower.:. Labour will:
and middle income backgrounds
* Maintain the apprenticeship lev
* Replace Advanced Learner Loans.. PPp iewy.. while taking measures to ensure and upfront course fees with direct...;; high quality by requiring the funding, making FE courses free at..:;.;. Institute for Apprenticeships and the point of use, including English..
Technical Education to report on for Speakers of Other Languages; an annual basis to the Secretary
(ESOL) courses..
of State on quality outcomes of
* Drive up quality and consistency incompleted apprenticeships to the FE sector by: ensure they deliver skilled workers.; for employers and real jobs for
+ Encouraging cooperation and.; iapprentices at the end of their leadership across colleges_::.;. training. And we will work with and sixth forms, improving_..; the devolved administrations to curriculum breadth and quality::
improve the operation of the levy
* Setting a target, backed up b; 88. ad* Set a target to double the number funding, for all FE teaching staff.:. nasof completed apprenticeships at to have a teaching qualification aie fiNVQ level 3 by 2O22 within five years.
us* Give employers more flexibility in
«In recognition of the role played by;.;.. how the levy is deployed, including private-sector providers, we would:
_. allowing the levy to be used for extend support for training tore-apprenticeshio programmes teachers in the private sectorpre-appP Pros
4OFOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWie b_oy \ fSe:
-. weem8
Ed te; ait* Guarantee trade union representation in the governance structures of the Institute of
Apprenticeships
* Protect the £44O million funding for apprenticeships for small-and medium-sized employers who don't pay the levy
* Set targets to increase apprenticeships for people with disabilities, care leavers and veterans, and ensure broad representation of women, BAME,
LGBT and people with disabilities in all kinds of apprenticeships
* Consult on introducing incentives for large employers to over-train numbers of apprentices to fill skills gaps in the supply chain and the wider sector
* Reverse cuts to Unionlearn
* Set up a commission on Lifelong
Learning tasked with integrating further and higher education.
42FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWnN
Iy j, A fy)
4/ a la‘
Labour will reintroduce maintenance grants for university students, and we will abolish university tuition fees.
University tuition is free in many
Labour believes education shouldnorthern European countries, and be free, and we will restore thisunder a Labour government it will principle. No one should be put offbe free here too.
educating themselves for lack of money or through fear of debt.
There is a real fear that students are being priced out of university education. Last year saw the steepest fall in university applications for
3O years.
Since the Conservatives came to power, university tuition fees have been trebled to over £9, OOO a year, and maintenance grants have been abolished and replaced with loans.
The average student now graduates from university, and starts their working life, with debts of £44, OOO.44FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWA FAIR DEAL
AT WORKPringbee‘To
Ween, ONT R I
Yee 5ween. here; tions of g tre Empioea(n after "eferr coPIver yw; el Reesed:
(the ants ang men t Tee: n to ent, mh otter reg*° 88 “the Em
Tce;99r, AG er int, erreq ang bety t ang 5 ments peEEMENT an emp)toas “the E
Cen a. SUF Fini. ereint”! Witne~-°¥Mens -m
A FAIR DEALSo we will review the rules on union recognition so that more workers
AT WO RKhave the security of a union.
At the same time as strengthening
Work should provide peopleworkers’ rights, we will make work with security and fulfilment. more fulfilling by using public
But for too many people workinvestment to upgrade our economy is insecure and does not makeand create high-quality jobs. While ends meet. the Conservatives stand back and allow insecure work to spread,
The Conservatives boast about theLabour will act to antes ood recovery of employment, but our‘obs and husineecee8 labour market is failing. Real-termsJ:
pay is still lower than before the crash, and jobs are increasingly low skilled and insecure.
A Labour government will invest in enforcement through a new Ministry of Labour, and empower workers and their trade unions - because we are stronger when we stand together.
46FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWRI G HTS AT WO RKentitlement so that workers ain Britain get the same proper. breaks as in other countries.
The next Labour government will bring in a 2Opoint plan for security7. Raise the Minimum Wage to the and equality at work: level of the Living Wage (expected to be at least £lO per hour b l. Give all workers equal rights fromP¥:2O2O) - for all workers aged l8 day one, whether part-time or; or over, so that work pays.
full-time, temporary or permanent
- so that working conditions are8. End the Public Sector Pay Cap - not driven down. because public sector workers deserve a pay rise after years of
2. Ban zero hours contracts - so that; payy falling wages.
every worker gets a guaranteed number of hours each week.9. Amend the takeover code to ensure every takeover proposal
3. Legislate to ensure that any'y; Prop va.: has a clear plan in place to employer wishing to recruit labour; protect workers and pensioners - from abroad does not undercut; because workers shouldn't suffer workers at home - because:. aewhen a company is sold.
it causes divisions when one workforce is used against another. lO. Roll out maximum pay ratios of 2O: l in the public sector and
4. Repeal the Trade Union Act:. Pt::; in companies bidding for public and roll out sectoral collective.
icontracts - because it cannot bargaining - because the most;. i. be right that wages at the top effective way to maintain good..;;. keep rising while everyone rights at work is collectively,. else's stagnates.
through a union.
5. Guarantee trade unions a right; r to access workplaces - so thati: eunions can speak to members and2 potential members. a
6. Propose four new public holidaysz
- bringing our country together. a to mark our four national patron7 saints days. These will be additional to statutory holiday.
CHAPTER O4 A FAIR DEAL AT WORK47ll. Ban unpaid internships - becauseonly awarding public contracts to it’s not fair for some to get a legcompanies which recognise trade up when others can't afford to. unions.
l2. Enforce all workers’ rights to trade2O. Introduce a civil enforcement union representation at work -system to ensure compliance so that all workers can bewith gender pay auditing - so supported when negotiatingthat all workers have fair access with their employer. to employment and promotion opportunities and are treated l3. Abolish employment tribunalPP fairly at work.
fees - so that people have access to justice. A Labour government will ensure
Britain abides by the global Labour l4. Double paid paternity leave to¥6;.; standards of the ILO conventions.
four weeks and increase paternity pay - because fathers are parentsAll workers should be able to work too and deserve to spend morein a safe environment and return to time with their new babies. their families at the end of the day.
Labour will enforce regulations that l5. Strengthen protections for;6.. save lives.
women against unfair redundancy
- because no one should beAs well as legislating against zero penalised for having children. hours contracts, there are many more workers on short hours l6. Hold a public inquiry into
_. contracts (some only guaranteed blacklisting - to ensure that a few hours per week), but who blacklisting truly becomes and;.. regularly work far more. We will remains a thing of the past.
strengthen the law so that those who l7. Give equalities reps statutorywork regular hours for more than l2 rights - so they have timeweeks will have a right to a regular to protect workers fromcontract, reflecting those hours.
discrimination..
We will also scrap the changes l8. Reinstate protection againstbrought in by the Conservatives in third party harassment - because2Ol4 to TUPE, which weakened the everyone deserves to be safeprotections for workers transferring at work. between contractors, and we will abolish the loophole to the agenc l9. Use public spending power toPgency. f; workers regulations known as the drive up standards, including::
Swedish derogation.
48FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWSO LOO f
SOLOS If.;
CSF de Ne.
6 Ae eeWe will consult with employers and trade unions on legislating for statutory bereavement leave, for time off work after the loss of close family members. We will also consult on toughening the law against assaulting workers who have to enforce laws such as age-related sales or ticketing arrangements, and who face regular abuse.
Labour will maintain the ACAS Early
Conciliation System to try to solve workplace issues efficiently, and we will protect the current compromise on Sunday trading hours.
Labour will also legislate to permit secure online and workplace balloting for industrial action votes and internal union elections.
Workers in Britain are among the easiest and cheapest to make redundant, meaning when multinational companies are taking decisions to downsize that British workers are at a disadvantage. We will consult with trade unions and industry on reviewing redundancy arrangements to bring workers in
Britain more into line with their
European counterparts.
Stagnating incomes have forced many to take on more debt. Labour will introduce a version of Scotland's
Debt Arrangement Scheme to give breathing space to households struggling with high debts.
5OFOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWSELF-EMPLOYED* Giving employment agencies and oeend-users joint responsibility for
WO RKE RSensuring that the rights of agency aworkers are enforced.
Self-employment can bring many* Rolling out sectoral collective benefits, freedoms and flexibilitiesbargaining and strengthening to people - and is a vital and oftentrade union rights, because entrepreneurial sector of ourempowering people to claim economy. their own rights in the workplace... is the most effective means of
But there is also mounting evidence.: enforcement.
that workers are being forced into self-employment by unscrupulousWe would also extend the rights of employers to avoid costs and theiremployees to all workers, including duties to workers. Labour will clampshared parental pay, making a down on bogus self-employment by: substantial and immediate difference to the quality of life of people in
+ Shifting the burden of proof, so: qypeop. insecure work. But there are real that the law assumes a worker is.
concerns that rapid changes to the an employee unless the employer; i.. world of work are rendering existing can prove otherwise..
employment categories outdated.
* Imposing punitive fines on posing P.; Labour recognises that the law employers not meeting their.
oy utecs. often struggles to keep up with responsibilities, helping to deter.. the ever-changing new forms of others from doing the same..
employment and work, so we will
+ Involving trade unions inset up a dedicated commission enforcement, e. g. by giving themto modernise the law around a seat on the executive board ofemployment status. New statutory the new Ministry of Labour. definitions of employment status would reduce the need for litigation
* Giving the Ministry of Labour.:8 and improve compliance.
the resources to enforce all workers’ rights. The commission will be led by;. legal and academic experts with
* Banning payroll companies,... representation from industry and sometimes known as umbrella... trade unions.
companies, which create a false structure to limit employers’ tax liabilities and limit workers’ rights.
CHAPTER O4 A FAIR DEAL AT WORK5l52FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWSOCIAL SECURITYSOCIAL SECU RITYOver 2.5 million women born in oethe l95Os have had their state ension age changed without fair
After seven years of rising povertyP ae 86.:;. notification. These women deserve and inequality, Labour will rebuild, oo,.. both recognition for the injustice and transform our social security:.. they have suffered and some kind system. Like the NHS, our social::.. of compensation for their losses.
security system is there for all of us in our time of need, providingAlongside our commitment to security and dignity in retirementextend Pension Credit to hundreds and the basics in life should weof thousands of the most vulnerable become sick or disabled, or fallwomen, Labour is exploring options on hard times. for further transitional protections, to ensure that all these women have
DIGN ITY FORsecurity and dignity in older age.
This must never happen again.
PENSION ERSLabour will legislate so that accrued rights to the basic state pension
Labour will always be on the sidecannot be changed, but future of pensioners and help ensurebenefits can.
security and dignity for older y. garyThe pension age is due to rise to people in retirement.
66 by the end of 2O2O. Labour
As the Conservatives abandonrejects the Conservatives’ proposal to their commitments to older people, increase the state pension age even
Labour will guarantee the statefurther. We will commission a new pension ‘triple lock’ throughout thereview of the pension age, specifically next Parliament. It will rise by at leasttasked with developing a flexible
2.5 per cent a year or be increased toretirement policy to reflect both keep pace with inflation or earnings, the contributions made by people, whichever is higher. the wide variations in life expectancy, and the arduous conditions of
The Winter Fuel Allowance and free. some work.
bus passes will also be guaranteed as universal benefits. We'll restore confidence in the workplace pension system and
We will protect the pensions of UKPPy.
uea; put people rather than profit at citizens living overseas in the EU or:... its centre. Labour will end rip-off further afield.
54FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWiJ_I
“tf, *f y.
a. a.
ay"86 eco- AY Soe oe I
~3. ee -~ srSS hidden fees and charges, and enable the development of large efficient pensions funds, which will mean more cash for scheme members and lower costs for employers.
A Labour government will commit to an immediate review of the mineworkers’ pension scheme and
British Coal superannuation scheme surplus, sharing arrangements between government and scheme beneficiaries.
CHAPTER O5 SOCIAL SECURITY55DIGN ITY FORin working families, we will acommit to tackle child poverty
TH OS E WH Owith a new Child Poverty Strategy.
The Tories have completely failed on
CAN N OT WO RKtheir promise of making work pay and on tackling the barriers to work faced
Poverty in Britain is rising due toby people with disabilities.
the Conservatives’ attempts to;
Labour supports a social model of balance the books on the backsanua disability. People may have a condition of the poorest. They have slashed.;,.; or an impairment but they are disabled social security over the last seven... by society. We need to remove years, leaving more people ina:.: wasthe barriers in society that restrict poverty, subject to a punitive;... opportunities and choices sanctions regime, and reliantfor people with disabilities on food banks. Peop:
We will build on the previous Labour
Labour will act immediately to end the; P. government's commitment to people worst excesses of the Conservative: Co..;. with disabilities in 2OO9 as signatories government's changes. We will:::
to the UN Convention on the Rights
* Scrap the punitive sanctions regimeof Persons with Disabilities, and incorporate it into UK law.
* Scrap the Bedroom TaxP
Labour will repeal the following cuts in
* Reinstate Housing Benefitsocial securi ‘su ort to peo ye with for under-2lswae y SUPPP P.
disabilities through a new Social Security
* Scrap cuts to Bereavement SupportBill published in our first year in office.
Payment. We will:
The cuts to work allowances in+ Increase Employment and Support
Universal Credit (UC), and the decisionAllowance (ESA) by £3O per week to limit tax credit and UC paymentsfor those in the work-related activity to the first two children in a family, group, and repeal cuts in the UC are an attack on low-income familieslimited capacity for work element.
and will increase child poverty. Labour.;.+ Increase Carer's Allowance by £ll to will reform and redesign UC, ending.. the level of Jobseekers’ Allowance.
six-week delays in payment and the
‘rape clause’.* Implement the court decision on
Personal Independence Payment
With nearly four million childrenP; y yo,.(PIP) so that there is real parity of currently living in poverty, the majority
56FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEW*~-‘.
fd~~
~ie,
4 &Sy ‘‘ °N
¥f Leann, I ¥ peSe~*
~JotRO RY7
7 x»Pat ¥a oe ae,
P>. >-
\>sg
AAFs
SRT-.
esteem between those with physicalWe will change the culture of the and mental-health conditions. social security system, from one that
-demonises people not in work to one
* Scrap the Work Capability and; P >Pf that is supportive and enabling.
Personal Independence Payment assessments and replace them withAs well as scrapping the Conservatives’ a personalised, holistic assessmentpunitive sanctions regime, we will process that provides each individualchange how Jobcentre Plus staff are with a tailored plan, building on theirperformance-managed.
strengths and addressing barriers.. oo. eeeLabour will strengthen access to justice
Labour will end the privatisation of: a:
for people with disabilities by enhancing assessments.; i the 2OlO Equality Act, enabling
* End the pointless stress ofdiscrimination at work to be challenged.
reassessments for people withWe will ensure that under the Istanbul severe long-term conditions. Convention, disability hate crime and,.. violence against women with disabilities
* Commission a report into expanding...
is reported annually, with national the Access to Work programme...
actions plans to address these issues.
CHAPTER O5 SOCIAL SECURITY5758FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWSECURE HOMES
FOR ALLSECU RE HOMESof homes. We will overhaul the aHomes and Communities Agency
FO R AL Lto be Labour's housing delivery body, aand give councils new powers to build the homes local communities need.
Home is at the heart of all of our lives. It’s the foundation on whichWe will prioritise brownfield sites and we raise our families, the bedrockprotect the green belt. We will start for our dreams and aspirations. work on a new generation of New
But for too many people, theTowns to build the homes we need housing pressures they face areand avoid urban sprawl.
etting worse not better. Britain
88.-.. We will make the building of new has a housing crisis - a crisis of.:.. ihomes, including council homes, supply and a crisis of affordability...
a priority through our National
After seven years of failure, theTransformation Fund, as part of
Conservatives have no plan toa joinedup industrial and skills fix the housing crisis. Since 2OlO, strategy that ensures a vibrant housebuilding has fallen to its lowestconstruction sector with a skilled level since the l92Os, rough sleepingworkforce and rights at work.
has risen every year, rents have risen... yyLabour will not only build more, faster than incomes, there are almost:.-_ we will build better. We will insulate
2OO, OOO fewer home-owners, andmore homes to help people manage new affordable housebuildingP peop8. the cost of energy bills, to reduce is at a 24year low..
preventable winter deaths, and to
It doesn't have to be like this. Labourmeet our climate change targets.
will invest to build over a millionWe will consult on new rules on new homes. By the end of the nextminimum space standards to prevent
Parliament we will be building at‘rabbit hutch’ properties and on new least lOO, OOO council and housingmodern standards for building ‘zero association homes a year forcarbon homes’.
genuinely affordable rent or sale..
We will ensure that local plans
Labour will establish a newaddress the need for older people's
Department for Housing to focushousing, ensuring that choice and on tackling the crisis and to ensuredownsizing options are readily housing is about homes for the many, _ available.
not investment opportunities for the, PP; aWe will keep the Land Registry in public few. Labour's new housing ministry.. oo°hands, where it belongs, and make will be tasked with improving theownership of land more transparent number, standards and affordabilityPP,
6OFOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWaps:
AE 7a NU Aa) Qa
)Zz;4y ESS I aeeseual [eons in their area to give them confidence that new homes will be available to them and their families.
After seven years of failure under
The number of home-owningthe Conservatives, Labour will build households has fallen by 9OO, OOOthe new homes first-time buyers for the under-45s since 2OlO. need - just as Labour councils have been doing right across the country,
Labour will back first-time buyers-Brgy igbuilding an average of nearly to buy that special first home. The l, OOO more new homes than number of affordable homes to buy.:; Conservative councils.
has plummeted by two-thirds under the Conservatives, so we will buildWe will back those who own their thousands more low-cost homeshomes, including home-owners who reserved for first-time buyers. Weown their home as leaseholders and will guarantee Help to Buy fundingwho are currently unprotected from until 2O27 to give long-term certaintyrises in ‘ground rent’ from developers to both first-time buyers and theor management companies. A Labour housebuilding industry. We will alsogovernment will give leaseholders give local people buying their firstsecurity from rip-off ground rents home ‘first dibs’ on new homes builtand end the routine use of leasehold houses in new developments. Pp RIVATE RE NTE RSWe will reverse the cruel decision ato abolish housing benefit for
We will end insecurity for privatel8 to 2l- year-olds, which risks renters by introducing controls onputting even more vulnerable.; young people on our streets.
rent rises, more secure tenancies, landlord licensing and new consumer rights for renters.
Soaring rents are a real problem
- leading to more families living in temporary accommodation, more people sleeping rough, and many not having enough money to save up for a deposit or for a rainy day.
Labour will make new three-year tenancies the norm, with an inflation cap on rent rises. Given the particular pressures in London we will look at giving the Mayor the power to give renters in London additional security.
We will legislate to ban letting agency fees for tenants.
We will also empower tenants to call time on bad landlords by giving renters new consumer rights. Renters are spending £9.6 billion a year on homes that the government classes as ‘non-decent’. Around a quarter of this is paid by housing benefit.
A Labour government would introduce new legal minimum standards to ensure properties are ‘fit for human habitation’ and empower tenants to take action if their rented homes are sub-standard.
62FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWI ¥ met F4a Tita, ‘ ra;* aie:4 eo a ot is a ie 4iat oy baer hs
COUNCIL ANDLabour will scrap the punitive abedroom tax, which has caused
SOCIAL TE NANTSmany people to be evicted from atheir home and their community.
Under the Conservatives, More council homes have been affordable housebuilding hassold off under the Conservatives and fallen to a 24year low. Labouronly one in five have been replaced, will build the genuinely affordabledespite long housing waiting lists.
homes to rent and buy that theLabour will suspend the rightto-buy country needs. policy to protect affordable homes
We will remove governmentfor local people, with councils only restrictions that stop councilsable to resume sales if they can prove building homes and begin thethey have a plan to replace homes sold like-for-like.
biggest council building programme for at least 3O years. We will ditch the Conservatives’ ban on long-term council tenancies to give council tenants security in their homes.
We want more people to have a secure tenancy in a home built to high standards.
CHAPTER O6 SECURE HOMES FOR ALL63HOMELESSNESS
Homelessness is not inevitable in a country as decent and well off as ours. However, since 2OlO the number of people sleeping rough in shop doorways and on park benches has more than doubled.
This shames us all. There can be no excuses - it must end. Full stop.
More families are living in temporary accommodation, meaning l2O, OOO children spent last Christmas without a home to call their own.
This growing homelessness shames the Conservatives. The spiralling rise in street homelessness results directly from decisions made by the Conservatives on pay, housing, mental health and social security.
Labour will set out a new national plan to end rough sleeping within the next Parliament, starting by making available 4, OOO additional homes reserved for people with a history of rough sleeping. We will also take action to tackle the root causes of homelessness, including safeguarding homeless hostels and other supported housing from crude
Conservative cuts to housing benefit.
64FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWHEALTHCARE
FOR ALLN H SLabour will focus resources eeon services to provide care closer to home and deliver a trul
In the aftermath of war and¥..2lst century health system.
national bankruptcy, it was a;
We will work towards a new model
Labour government that found::. of community care that takes into the resources to create a National:. account not only primary care but
Health Service - our proudest.. wae; also social care and mental health.
achievement, providing universalWe will increase funding to GP healthcare for all on the basis of:. 8. services to ensure patients can access need, free at the point of use..
the care they need. And we will halt
Labour will invest in our NHS, pharmacy cuts and review provision to give patients the modern, to ensure all patients have access well-resourced services they needto pharmacy services, particularly in for the 2lst century. Labour willdeprived or remote communities.
ensure that NHS patients get the
P8Labour will tackle the growing world-class quality of care they need..; problem of rationing of services and that staff are able to deliver the.: and medicines across England, standards that patients expect.;; taking action to address ‘postcode
We will guarantee and upholdlotteries’ and making sure that the the standards of service to whichquality of care you receive does not patients are legally entitleddepend on which part of the country under the NHS constitution. you live in. We will ensure all NHS
By guaranteeing access to treatmentpatients get fast access to the most within l8 weeks, we will take oneeffective new drugs and treatments, million people off NHS waiting listsand insist on value-for-money by the end of the next Parliament. agreements with pharmaceutical
We will guarantee that patients cancompanies.
be seen in A&E within four hours. co. To make sure that autistic people
By properly resourcing the NHS,.. are able to access the whole of
Labour will stop the routine breach.:
their community and to put an end of safe levels of bed occupancy, and.... to social isolation, Labour will set we will end mixed-sex wards. Wei.. the ambition to make our country will deliver the Cancer Strategy for.:... autism-friendly. We will ensure that
England in full by 2O2O, helping 2.5..
wefeveryone with a long-term condition, million people living with cancer. And,.;., such as those with diabetes, will have by properly resourcing ambulance._.; the right to a specialised care plan, services, we will end the scandal of..; and access to condition-management slowing ambulance-response times.::.
education. We will ensure high66FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEW.- quality, personalised care for peopleWe will take action to significantly approaching the end of their life, reduce infant deaths and to ensure wherever and whenever they need it. all families who lose a baby receive appropriate bereavement support.
Labour will ensure that NHS EnglandPPropPP completes the trial programmeLabour will invest in children’s to provide PrEP (pre-exposurehealth, bringing in a new government prophylaxis) as quickly as possible, ambition for our children to be and fully roll out the treatment tothe healthiest in the world. We will high-risk groups to help reducefight health inequalities to break
HIV infection. the scandalous link between child ill-health and poverty. We will
Labour will fund free parking in: Py.; introduce a new Index of Child
NHS England - for patients, staff and..; Health to measure progress against visitors - by increasing the tax on.;; oo.. international standards, and report private medical insurance premiums.. Lo.
annually against four key indicators:
obesity, dental health, under-fives and mental health. We will set up a new
Public healthneatP
£25O million Children’s Health Fund
For our health and care services tobe -_ to support our ambitions. As part of a sustainable in the long term, we needpreventative healthcare drive, Labour a renewed commitment to keepingwill increase the number of health people fit and well. Labour will focusvisitors and school nurses.
our efforts on children’s health,...;. We will publish a new childhood protecting the wellbeing of the;_;. obesity strategy within the first lOO nation for the decades to come.., days, with proposals on advertising
CHAPTER O7 HEALTHCARE FOR ALL67and food labelling. We will make aNHS staff concerted effort to address poorTo suarantee the best possible childhood oral health in England. B: P aye. services for patients, Labour
Labour will implement the Soft Drinks.
will invest in our health and care
Industry Levy, commonly known as;, workforce. A Labour government the ‘sugar tax’.. an will step in with a long-term
We will implement a strategy forworkforce plan for our health service the children of alcoholics basedthat gives staff the support they need on recommendations drawn upto do the best for their patients.
by independent experts.
yPPLabour will scrap the NHS pay cap,
Labour will implement a Tobaccoput pay decisions back into the hands
Control Plan, focusing on issues ofof the independent pay review body mental health and young smokers. and give our NHS workers the pay..;. they deserve. Labour will protect
Loneliness is an increasing problem°:. patients and legislate to ensure for our society, and as Jo Cox put;:
on.; safe staffing levels in the NHS.
it, “young or old, loneliness doesn't discriminate”. A Labour governmentLabour's long-term ambition is for will create a more equal societyour health system to have the best for the many by working withtrained staff in the world, ready to communities, civil society anddeal with whatever they have to face business to reduce loneliness. in the years to come. Labour will reintroduce bursaries and fundin
Labour will address historic public6 oo..; for health-related degrees. Labour health injustices. We will hold a public..
_. will support doctors to deliver the enquiry into contaminated blood.::.; oo, best care possible by investing in the
We will also hold a public inquiry.;. a;. training, education and development into medicines, including Valproate,:... of doctors throughout their careers.
medical devices and medical products licensing and regulation. Labour will immediately guarantee the rights of EU staff working in our
A Labour government would&.& i,.. health and care services. Labour maintain our commitment to improve;;.. will support NHS whistleblowers to sexual-health services, especially HIV:.; ae. make sure health service staff are services which will include reducing:. able to speak up in support of the the rates of undiagnosed and late-.:..; best possible standards for patients.
diagnosed HIV, ending the stigma.:..: Labour will make it an aggravated of HIV in society, and promoting.. an‘criminal offence to attack NHS staff.
the increased availability of testing and treatment.
68FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWNHS fundingWe will introduce a new legal duty.. on the Secretary of State and on NHS
Labour will commit to over.
ve. England to ensure that excess private
£3O billion in extra funding over the; next Parliament through increasingprofits are not made out of the NHS.. at the expense of patient care.
income tax for the highest 5 per cent of earners and by increasing tax on private medical insurance, and we will free up resources by halving the fees paid to management consultants.
Labour will boost capital funding for the NHS, to ensure that patients are cared for in buildings and using equipment that are fit for the 2lst century. And we will introduce a new
Office for Budget Responsibility for
Health to oversee health spending and scrutinise how it is spent.
Labour will halt and review the NHS
‘Sustainability and Transformation
Plans’, which are looking at closing health services across England, and ask local people to participate in the redrawing of plans with a focus on patient need rather than available finances. We will create a new quality, safety and excellence regulator - to be called ‘NHS Excellence’.
The next Labour government will reverse privatisation of our NHS and return our health service into expert public control. Labour will repeal the
Health and Social Care Act that puts profits before patients, and make the NHS the preferred provider.
We will reinstate the powers of the
Secretary of State for Health to have overall responsibility for the NHS.
CHAPTER O7 HEALTHCARE FOR ALL69yr oe.’ ><,:*_ ": Pd y ‘ ifbe
Oy AGoJ
Ihi AB ytie»-__
I7 yae. ra*. ~)q
©; Jait weyaa+ 2° 2a-- -'-_a be. a-<«'Foal“4 ‘
€ ‘eg 2% a. @)es uA ><r - S*. asl A al_-. a. _‘ es >; 7 *Z _).. ce ~~", ©. > a~. a ans
-gs Ste 4 Ttete, h.%I es _ _e7%;_ 2. “s ~y.-- i)ee TM. 4 sSs - ll ealx +? a aMiao. 5 es a sebe, pe II -. TOWARDSthe first year. This will be enough afor providers to pay a real living
A NATI O NALwage without cutting the quality aof care they provide. It will allow
CARE SERVICEimplementation of the principles of the Ethical Care Charter, already. agadopted in 28 council areas, ending
Our social care sector is in crisis,;,.. l5minute care visits and providing with severe consequences for the.... acare workers with paid travel time, quality of care, public finances,_.
access to training and an option to personal assets, pressures on.. choose regular hours.
unpaid carers of family and friends, and delays to dischargingLabour will also increase the Carer’s patients from hospitals. Allowance for unpaid full-time carers. to align the benefit with rates of the
Care services have been slowly but, ouJobseeker’s Allowance.
relentlessly privatised. In recent years, one in ten people reachingShort-term funding solutions the age of 65 have faced lifetime carewill not address the fundamental costs of over £lOO, OOO, with somelong-term challenges of our homeowners paying the entire valueageing demographics, nor meet of their homes. the growing demands arising from late-life illnesses.
The Conservatives’ cuts have led to £4.6 billion lost from social careThe National Care Service will be budgets, despite rising demand. built alongside the NHS, with a
Around l.2 million older peopleshared requirement for single have care needs that are goingcommissioning, partnership unmet. Care in the community hasarrangements, pooled budgets become a cover for unseen neglect. and joint working arrangements.
We will build capacity to move
In our first term, Labour will lay: P. y... quickly towards a joinedup service the foundations of a National Carea; that will signpost users to all the
Service for England..:
appropriate services at the gateway
Our first urgent task will be tothrough which they arrive.
address the immediate fundingoo.... ae: In its first years, our service will crisis. We will increase the social care. ma_ va: require an additional £3 billion of budgets by a further £8 billion over.
ae; public funds every year, enough to the lifetime of the next Parliament,: oa_.; us_place a maximum limit on lifetime including an additional £l billion for
CHAPTER O7 HEALTHCARE FOR ALL7lpersonal contributions to care costs, raise the asset threshold below which people are entitled to state support, and provide free end of life care. There are different ways the necessary monies can be raised. We will seek consensus on a cross-party basis about how it should be funded, with options including wealth taxes, an employer care contribution or a new social care levy.
Improving the quality of social care is a vital part of providing dignity in older age and independence and support for people who are vulnerable or have a disability or a mental health condition.
Labour will build a new National
Care Service. We will also set out the funding alternatives clearly and honestly, seeking to implement change through consensus.
Providing dignity and care in old age should transcend party politics and campaign slogans.
72FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWMENTAL HEALTHof mental health funding goes to aservices for children and young eople. In recent years, referrals
Mental ill-health is the biggestP Pp"y to Child and Adolescent Mental unaddressed health challenge of::. Health Services have increased by our age. Around one in four people..;; two-thirds, and the number of young in the UK will experience a mental...
people presenting to A&E units with health problem each year. aio psychiatric conditions has doubled.
Yet, since 2OlO mental health fundingSuicide is now the most common has been cut, the number of mentalcause of death for boys aged health nurses has fallen by 6,6OO andbetween five and l9.
remaining mental health budgets-.; Labour will invest in early have been raided to plug holes..::. intervention by increasing the elsewhere in the NHS..
proportion of mental health
Labour will work to reverse thebudgets spent on support for damage done to mental healthchildren and young people.
services under this Tory government, We will ensure that access to a which is particularly hitting servicescounselling service is available for for LGBT and BAME communities. all children in secondary schools.
In order to protect services, we willGiving mental health the same ring-fence mental health budgets andpriority as physical health means ensure funding reaches the frontline. not only ensuring access to services, but also making improvements,
We will end the scandal of children. gimp o.,. to those services. Choice is important being treated on adult mental health::. in a modern NHS, and patients wards and stop people being sent;;.; who receive their therapy of choice across the country, away from their.
have better outcomes. Labour will support networks, to secure the;;, therefore ask the National Institute treatment they need by bringing. for Health and Care Excellence forward the ending of outof-area:
(NICE) to evaluate the potential placements to 2Ol9..::
for increasing the range of evidenceLabour will also bring an end tobased psychological therapies the neglect of children’s mentalon offer.
health. Half of people with mental health problems as adults present with symptoms by the age of l4.
Yet, across England only 8 per cent
CHAPTER O7 HEALTHCARE FOR ALL7374FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWSAFER
COMMUNITIESmezh
A~P
‘~4LD5
ICE ag;\
PO LICEWe will support the police in the aperformance of their duties. We will
AN D CRI M Eprovide officers, police community asupport officers and civilian staff with. the equipment and people they need
Last year, there were an estimatedq; P. P »Py.
we es; to provide effective policing services,
6. l million incidents of crime:.:.. including from the growing threat of experienced by adults in England.:.: cybercrime. We will work with them and Wales. Almost every police.. to ensure that our communities are force in the country recorded an safer, for all of us.
increase in crime, with worrying rises in some of the most violentWe will champion community policing offences, including gun and knifepolicies and incentivise good policing crime and homicide. practice, working with Police and
Crime Commissioners throughout
On Theresa May's watch, policethe country on strategies to srevent numbers have been cut by 2O, OOO..'y.§P.. crime. We will also work to eliminate
Cuts to the police force endangeroo..
as. institutional biases against BAME communities and endanger police..., communities, that mean you are still officers too. Labour's approach to;.;.. far more likely to be stopped and policing crime will be different..
searched as a black or Asian man.
76FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWLabour will recruit lO, OOO more police -_ the resources and the powers they officers to work on community beats, need to protect our country and equivalent to at least one more forkeep us all safe. We will also ensure every neighbourhood in the country. that such powers do not weaken our.. individual rights or civil liberties.
We will ensure appropriate support is provided to victims of crime andWhen - as they sometimes will - introduce legislation for minimumthese aims collide, the exercise of standard entitlements to service frominvestigatory powers must always criminal justice agencies. be both proportionate and necessary..; We will reintroduce effective judicial
The level of violence against.
women and girls is not acceptable. oversight over how and when they
Labour will emphasise the safetyare used, when the circumstances of women and girls by appointingdemand that our collective security, outweighs an individual freedom.
a commissioner to set new standards for tackling domestic and sexualLabour will review the Prevent violence. We will establish a Nationalprogramme with a view to assessing
Refuge Fund and ensure stabilityboth its effectiveness and its potential for rape crisis centres. We will maketo alienate minority communities.
age-appropriate sex and relationshipIn doing so, we will address the education a compulsory part of thegovernment's failure to take any curriculum so young people can learneffective new measures against about respectful relationships. a growing problem of extreme
We will strengthen the law, banningor violent radicalisation.
the use of community resolutions as a response to domestic violence.
Labour will continue to enforce effective measures to prevent all forms of abuse, including female genital mutilation.
Security and counter-terrorism
Labour will maintain the cross-border security cooperation agreements with our intelligence partners in
Europe and beyond. We will always provide our security agencies with
CHAPTER O8 SAFER COMMUNITIES77_~-
<a-
~_- ~-_ -_‘-
8 Denier:
BO RD E Rteachers, medical staff and other public sector workers into unpaid
SECU RITYimmigration officers, forcing them to provide information toe easto the authorities.
Border security is vital in preventing serious crimesThe Conservatives promised and including child abduction, peoplefailed to deliver lOO per cent exit trafficking, smuggling of drugschecks at the borders. Labour will and guns, terrorism and modernrecruit 5OO more border guards to day slavery. add to our safeguards and controls.
Contrary to the Conservative government's rhetoric, they have not taken control of our borders or strengthened our national security.
Instead, they have suppressed the independent inspector's reports highlighting weaknesses in our borders and cut the Border Force by thousands of personnel. They want to turn private sector landlords,
78FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWFl RE AN DLabour will recruit 3, OOO new afirefighters, review staffing levels,
RESCUE SERVICESand consult on national minimum standards for the service. We will reinstate separate governance
Labour will halt cuts to thePg... arrangements for Fire and
Fire Service. The Conservatives..
oo.. Police Services.
have cut lO, OOO firefighter jobs and closed dozens of fire stations. We will give the Fire and Rescue
As a result, response times haveServices a statutory duty to cogot slower and lives have been putordinate and respond to floods.
at risk.
a;‘ \ if5"ya._
CHAPTER O8 SAFER COMMUNITIES79JUSTICErights, by the delays arising from
Soovercrowded courts and by the costs of fees.
We all need access to the justice system to protect us from thoseEligibility for legal aid has been who would deny us our rights. withdrawn across a whole range
Labour will set out to make Britainof areas. This has had disturbing a fair society with liberties for all, consequences for the delivery governed by the rule of law, and inof justice.
which the law is enforced equally.
quaryDemocracy is founded upon the
The Conservatives threaten ourrule of law and judicial independence.
Human Rights Act and may withdrawWe will also review the judicial us from the European Convention ofappointments process, to ensure a
Human Rights. Labour will retain thejudiciary that is more representative
Human Rights Act. of our society.
Justice is all too often denied. Labour will immediately
Too many ordinary people knowre-establish early advice entitlements this. There are football fans, tradein the Family Courts. The shameful unionists, environmental activistsconsequences of withdrawal have and people living with disabilitiesincluded a requirement for victims whose personal experiencesof domestic abuse to pay doctors for provide first-hand testimony. certification of their injuries. Labour's lans will remove that requirement.
Labour will hold public inquiriesP.. q:.. ee: At the same time, we will legislate into historic injustices. We will. a oo, to prohibit the cross examination of open inquiries into Orgreave and_. i,... victims of domestic violence by their blacklisting. We will release all.. abuser in certain circumstances.
papers relating to the Shrewsbury
24 trials and the 37 Cammell LairdWe will reintroduce funding for the shipyard workers. preparation of judicial review cases.
udicial review is an important wa
Justice today has become theJ. Py. of holding government to account.
preserve of the rich. Budget cuts,. There are sufficient safeguards to mean that thousands are deprived:.;, discourage unmeritorious cases.
of fair resolutions. Justice is eroded by the poor decisions of privatisedWe will review the legal aid means assessments, by the withdrawal oftests, including the capital test for legal aid, by the removal of appealthose on income-related benefits.
8OFOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWLabour will consider theLabour will not prohibit the courts reinstatement of other legal aidfrom raising monies to provide entitlements after receiving the finalservices, but we will introduce a recommendations of the Access toratio to establish the maximum
Justice Commission led by Lord Bach. difference between actual costs
The justice system can be bewilderingand charges levied.
and intimidating. There are manyLabour will continue to extend improvements that canbe made both _ the use of technology in our court to the law and to the court processes. service where it enhances access to
Labour will introduce a nofaultJustice, timely dispute resolution and: efficient administration.
divorce procedure.
A Labour government will consult on establishing an environmental tribunal with simplified procedures to hear challenges to unlawful government decisions, like those made on the air quality strategy, without engaging in prohibitively expensive processes. PRISONS AN Drehabilitation revolution, and oOthen just gave up. Their proposal
PRO BATIONnow is to lock up more and more aindividuals, ignoring the evidence
S E RVI C Ethat our prisons are too often adumping grounds for people who.. need treatment more than they need
Labour is tough on crime and: oo,. punishment. Labour will insist on tough on the causes of crime, buta.. personal rehabilitation plans for we won't make the lives of workers:. eeall prisoners.
in the criminal justice system tougher. Prison officers, probationPrison should always be a last resort officers and other workers need- the state’s most severe sanction for the resources to do their jobsserious offences. It should never be safely, effectively and successfully. a substitute for failing mental health. services, or the withdrawal of funding
Our prisons are overcrowded... from drug treatment centres. We will
Staffing levels are too low. The._ ere. review the provision of mental health situation is dangerous and violence.:..;. oo.. services in prisons.
against prison officers is rising. Riots and disturbances in our prisons areUnder a Labour government, increasing. Prison escapes causethere will be no new private prisons distress to people living near prisons. and no public sector prisons will.. be privatised.
A Labour government will publishP annual reports on prisoner-staffLabour's innovative models of youth ratios, with a view to maintainingjustice successfully turned round safety and ending overcrowding. the lives of many young people,.;. steering them away from crime
We will recruit 3, OOO more prison&y.;. and towards more constructive officers and review the training and:.. jways. In government, we will again professional development available.;.;-;... continue to innovate and incentivise
We will publish prison officer to,:... local authorities, police forces prisoner ratios for all prisons. Our.;.. and probation services to engage proposal to lift the public sector;;.. effectively with young people at pay cap will help to increase the: Se::;. risk of drifting into anti-social or recruitment and retention of both::
criminal behaviours. We will embed prison officers and probation officers. Co,.
restorative justice practices across
Reoffending rates are too high. all youth offending institutions.
The Conservatives talked of a
82FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWThe part-privatisation of probation services has already failed.
Labour will review the role of Community Rehabilitation
Companies.
The Conservatives bulldozed changes to the probation service through despite warnings that they had not been tested and were founded on a weak evidence base.
CHAPTER O8 SAFER COMMUNITIES8384FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWLEADING
RICHER LIVESLO CALunder-resourced and disempowered, awith democratic planning authorities
COM MUN ITIESunable to stand up to big developers.
aAs a result, planning decisions have... become too influenced by narrow
Councils deliver vital local..:.._economic considerations, with services to our communities, devel' profit takid. evelopers’ profit taking precedence but their budgets have beenPP., & P. over community priorities.
slashed by Conservative cuts.
This has led to a deterioration ofA Labour government will properly local services, from bin collectionresource and bolster planning to road repair, and the loss ofauthorities with fuller powers to important community assetsput people and communities at the such as libraries, youth centresheart of planning. We will update and women’s refuges. compulsory purchase powers to... make them more effective as a tool
Labour believes in devolving power:.
“s. to drive regeneration and unlock to local communities but that requires; planned development.
the necessary funding follows.
You cannot empower localUnder the Conservatives, nearly government if you impoverish it.£4OO million has been cut from youth aservices and over 6OO youth centres
A Labour government will give local,. have closed. Labour will end the cuts government extra funding next year.; waeooto youth services.
We will initiate a review into reforming council tax and businessWe will continue to support all rates and consider new optionstraining routes for social workers, such as a land value tax, to ensureincluding initial social work training local government has sustainableprovided within or accredited by a funding for the long term. higher education institution. We will.. also prevent the private sector and
Labour is the party of devolutionP aP.
_. subsidiaries of private companies and we believe in handing back power:..
ue; from running child protection to communities. We will devolve.:;;. services. We will deliver earlier powers over economic development,;..; protection to victims of abuse by complete with the necessary funding..; strengthening mandatory reporting,
It is through the planning systemand guaranteeing allegations will be that communities can shape thereported and action taken to make kinds of high streets, homes andchildren safe.
amenities that they want. But under the Conservatives, planning has been
86FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEW-\rf -I
2 r. -: I
3. <« «H*
/- LLC
And we will refocus social care to workof commercial fostering agencies, with families in local communities toas well as commissioning a review prevent children becoming at risk ofon establishing a national going into care. fostering service.
The government is currentlyWe will extend Staying Put failing to develop a strategy forarrangements to support all the wholesale improvement ofchildren and young people in the care system that delivers forresidential and other forms of all, not just those children beingcare until they are 2l.
considered for adoption. We will..
P. We will enshrine the European promote the care and educational.;. Convention on the Rights of achievement of our most vulnerablewas‘.. the Child into domestic law.
children and increase support for children in kinship and foster care, Labour will fund child burial fees for and their families. It is importantbereaved parents, ensuring that they that other forms of care, such asare scrapped in all council areas. We kinship care and fostering, are notrecognise that some councils have marginalised, as this will not resultalready made this humane move.
in the step-change we need to see.:...; Libraries are vital social assets, valued in outcomes for looked after children.... by communities across the country.
Labour will support further regulation
CHAPTER O9 LEADING RICHER LIVES87We will ensure libraries are preservedWe will give members of the for future generations and updatedLocal Government Pension Scheme with wifi and computers to meetfull trustee status to help control modern needs. We will reintroduceinvestments, and reduce fees library standards so that governmentand charges.
can assess and guide councils in..
a.. This Conservative government has delivering the best possible service..
taken rural communities for granted,
Labour will end the closure ofwith chronic underinvestment in
Crown Post Office branches, whichtransport, broadband and public play a major role in serving theirservices, including the closure of local communities. We will also set upschools, post offices and libraries.
a commission to establish a Post... Rural infrastructure and industry has
Bank, owned by the Post Office and.:
rovidine a full range of bankinbeen neglected. Labour will invest in
P. 88;8broadband, housing and transport services in every community.; to create jobs and ensure that the
Labour will give communities morenation’s prosperity is felt beyond power to shape their town centres, our large towns and cities.
by strengthening powers to protect y8BP. P; Labour's national investment post offices, community pharmacies,::; plans include coastal protections, high street banks, sports clubs,. better flood management and the pubs and independent shops,; broadband and 4G extensions that and promote measures to decrease...; will underpin the future success high-street vacancies..
of rural small businesses.
We will set up a national review of; Rural councils deliver public services local pubs to examine the causes for;.;: differently, and this needs to be their large-scale demise, as well as:..
areflected in funding allocation establishing a joint taskforce that:..;; oanmechanisms. We will consider will consider future sustainability..:.
these differences in our reevaluation
We will reduce the maximum stakeof the business rate schemes.
on Fixed Odds Betting TerminalsWe will introd; fing’. e will introduce a ‘rural-proofin from £lOO to £2. Labour will alsoP. 8.; process so that all our laws, policies legislate to increase the delay... and programmes consider their between spins to reduce the:.. impact on rural communities.
addictive nature of the games.
88FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWLabour will support tourism at theWe will reinstate the Agricultural heart of government. The tourismWages Board to underpin industry represents 9.6 per centemployment standards and wages.
of UK employment, 4.9 per cent of. a..
export and 9 per cent of GDP, but itsWe will make utility companies return importance is too often forgotten. roads toa condition no worse than
Labour will ensure that tourismwhen they started digging.
becomes a national priority again.
We will reinstate the cross-Whitehall ministerial group on tourism, and ensure that government ministers across departments understand how their roles fit into the national tourism agenda.
The Conservatives have failed to provide a clear, ambitious or sustainable vision for the future of the farming, food and fishing industries.
We will expand the role of the
Groceries Code Adjudicator to ensure suppliers and consumers get a fair deal.
We will reconfigure funds for farming and fishing to support smaller traders, local economies, community benefits and sustainable practices.
We will allow EU workers employed across farming, fishing and food manufacturing to remain in the UK, and reinstate the Seasonal Agricultural
Workers Scheme.
CHAPTER O9 LEADING RICHER LIVES89TRANSPO RTRailways Act l993 under which the aConservatives privatised our railways.
Labour will invest in a modern, In public ownership, we will deliver integrated, accessible andreal improvements for passengers sustainable transport systemby capping fares, introducing free that is reliable and affordable. wifi across the network, ensuring. safe staffing levels, ending the
Our transport systems illustrate;..;.. expansion of driver only operations, the abject failure of Tory policies:;... erand introducing legal duties to relentless deregulation, privatisation: a
‘improve accessibility for people and fragmentation. veh dice bitte:
with disabilities.
They say we get choice and. y YWes;; Across the country we will enable efficiency but the reality of their::.
rencouncils to provide first-class bus transport privatisations has been.:.. services by extending the powers to that services are less reliable, safety..; fre-regulate local bus services to all is compromised, fares have risen,.... areas that want them, and we will ticketing has become complicated..;; support the creation of municipal bus and air quality has worsened...
companies that are publicly run for
On our railways, we pay somepassengers not profit.
of the highest fares in Europe.8.. PUnder the Conservatives, bus fares for increasingly unreliable and.:. have risen and services have been overcrowded services. a.
cut. Labour will introduce regulations
The beneficiaries of public fundingto designate and protect routes of siphoned off through transportcritical community value, including privatisations have been thethose that serve local schools, earnings of directors, dividendshospitals and isolated settlements in for shareholders and the coffersrural areas.
of overseas governments...
A publicly owned railway system can
Labour will prioritise public servicebe the backbone of our plans for over private profit. And we will startintegrated transport. It will be built by bringing our railways back intoon the platform of Network Rail, public ownership, as franchiseswhich we will retain whole, working expire or, in other cases, withwith the devolved administrations.
franchise reviews or break clauses. We will ensure new rolling stock is
We will introduce a Public Ownershippublicly owned and will encourage of the Railways Bill to repeal theexpansion of public freight services
9OFOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWin a publicly owned railway that will leave our roads freer of traffic and~ our air cleaner. We will facilitate7
British procurements, including4 RA‘> steel, whenever possible. i a aac <l jtlt
A Labour government will invest toSa@aTMel regenerate the local and regionalEE, C2. f> economies across the whole country, ee scn 7 so that every area gets its fair shareaX;>" of transport investment.; >
A Labour government will complete) the HS2 high-speed rail line from
London through Birmingham to
Leeds and Manchester and thenTo prepare for global new trade into Scotland, consulting witharrangements, we will study the communities affected about thefeasibility of port development optimal route. We will link HS2across the UK.
with other rail investments, such asa... We will invest in Scotland,
Crossrail of the North (tying together usWales and Northern Ireland our great Northern cities) and on to:... too, working with devolved the Durham Freight Centre. We will,-;. oo, administrations through the UK build a new Brighton Main Line for.,
National Infrastructure Commission the South East..
and its devolved counterparts.
In London, to ensure our capital.;;. Our plans will encourage and continues to prosper, we will build.; enable people to get out of their
Crossrail 2.
cars, for better health and a cleaner
To harness the economic potentialenvironment.
of new technologies and science,...; Labour will position the UK at the we will complete the Science Vale forefront of the development, transport arc that runs from Oxford:. manufacture and use of ultra low to Cambridge through Milton Keynes emission vehicles, supporting the
And we will deliver rail electrificationcreation of clean modes of transport and expansion across the wholethrough investment in low emission country, including in Wales and thevehicles.
South West. We will also consult...; ueWe will retrofit thousands of diesel with local communities to reopen...; buses in areas with the most severe air branch lines..
quality problems to Euro 6 standards.
CHAPTER O9 LEADING RICHER LIVES9lWe will reform the legislationLabour recognises the need for governing taxi and private hireadditional airport capacity in the services, introducing nationalSouth East. We welcome the work standards to guarantee safety anddone by the Airports Commission, accessibility, updating regulationsand we will guarantee that any to keep pace with technologicalairport expansion adheres to our change and ensuring a level playingtests that require noise issues to field between operators. be addressed, air quality to be
We will invite the Nationalprotected, the UK's climate change, obligations met and growth across
Infrastructure Commission to the country supported.
recommend the next stages for developing and upgrading theWe will continue working with our
National Cycle Network. We reaffirmneighbours through the European the commitments in the Cycling andUnion's Highways of the Sea
Walking Investment Strategy. programme and by negotiating to.. retain membership of the Common
We will continue to upgrade our:
highways and improve roadworks atAviation Area and Open Skies known bottlenecks. The Al North, thearrangements.
Severn Bridge and the A3O provide essential connections and require our urgent consideration. We will work with the Welsh Government to scrap the tolls on the Severn Bridge.
After seven years of stalled progress,
Labour will reset the UK's road safety vision and ambitiously strive for a transport network with zero deaths, reintroducing road-safety targets, setting out bold measures that will continuously improve safety standards.
We will refocus the roads building and maintenance programmes, connecting our communities, feeding public transport hubs and realising untapped economic potential.
92FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEW; resilience, invest in rural and coastal communities, and guarantee the a. protection and advancement of
Investing in our environment;.. annenvironmental quality standards.
is investing in our future. We will defend and extend existingThe Conservatives’ threatened environmental protections. We‘bonfire of red tape’ is a threat to will champion sustainable farming, our environmental protections and food and fishing by investing into the quality of our lives. Their and promoting skills, technology, record on combating climate change market access and innovation. and environmental damage has been
The Conservatives broke theirone of inaction and broken promises.
promise to be the greenestThe balance needs resetting: our government ever. They haveair is killing us, our farms face an allowed fracking in national parks, uncertain future, our fish stocks evaded their responsibilities on airare collapsing, our oceans are used quality and cut the funding for floodas dumping grounds, and our forests, defences. The future of our farming, green belt, national parks, Areas food and fishing industries hangsof Outstanding Natural Beauty and in the balance, to be used as leverageSites of Special Scientific Interest in Brexit negotiations. are all under threat.
Only a Labour government willLabour will introduce a new Clean prioritise a sustainable, long-termAir Act to deal with the Conservative future for our farming, fishing andlegacy of illegal air quality. We will food industries, fund robust floodsafeguard habitats and species in the‘blue belts’ of the seas and oceansANIMAL WELFARE surrounding our island. We willee set guiding targets for plastic bottle...
&. 6 WA'sP; Animals in our food chain need deposit schemes, working with.. welfare standards. Domestic food manufacturers and retailers.... animals require stronger protection to reduce waste. We will protect our..
vuesLo, from cruelty. Wild animals bees by prohibiting neonicotinoids.;; need a sustainable ecosystem.
as soon as our EU relationship allows us to do so. We will workLabour's vision is for the UK to lead with farmers and foresters to plantthe world with high animal welfare a million trees of native species tostandards in the wild, in farming and promote biodiversity and betterfor domestic animals. Labour will flood management. Unlike theincrease the maximum sentence
Conservatives who attempted tofor those convicted of committing privatise our forests, Labour willanimal cruelty.
keep them in public hands..
PPWe will promote cruelty-free
Our stewardship of the environmentanimal husbandry and consult on needs to be founded on soundways to ensure better enforcement principles and based on scientificof agreed standards.
assessments. We will establish. a.
We will prohibit the third-party sale a science innovation fund, workingoo::.. of puppies, introduce and enforce with farmers and fisheries, that will..: a total ban on ivory trading, and include support for our small scale..
isupport the ban on wild animals fishing fleet..
in circuses.
We will cease the badger cull, mTM.} F elwhich spreads bovine TB.
iLabour ended fox hunting, deer
‘7hunting and hare coursing.;: Only a Labour government will:-_maintain the bans.
94FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWCU LTU REtheir services, and others starting ato charge entry fees. The Cultural
FO R ALLCapital Fund will have a particular afocus on projects that could increase woe,.. museums’ and galleries’ income
Britain’s creative industries arean and viability.
the envy of the world, a source of national pride, a driver of inwardLabour will end cuts to local authority investment and tourism, andabudgets to support the provision of symbol of the kind of countrylibraries, museums and galleries.
we are now and aspire to be inWe will take steps to widen the reach the future. As Britain leaves theof the Government Art Collection so
EU, we will put our world-classthat more people can enjoy it.
creative sector at the heart of our...
oe.. We will continue to mark the ongoing negotiations and future industrial:
centenary of the First World War, strategy. We need to do more to.. and the sacrifice of all those who died open up the arts and creative.::.. during it. Labour remains committed industries to everyone.; to honouring the role of all who
We will introduce a £l billion Culturalhave served our country, including
Capital Fund to upgrade our existingthe Sikh, Hindu, Muslim and Jewish cultural and creative infrastructuresoldiers who fought for Britain.
to be ready for the digital age and_.... Our thriving creative sector, from invest in creative clusters across the;;
__, the games industry to fashion, country, based on a similar modelae.. ineeds a strong pipeline of skilled to enterprise zones. Administeredtalent ttain itth; alent to sustain its growth.
by the Arts Council, the fund§ will be available over a five-yearLabour will introduce an arts pupil period. It will be among the biggestpremium to every primary school arts infrastructure funds ever, in England - a £l6O million annual transforming the country’s culturalper year boost for schools to invest landscape. in projects that will support cultural. i, activities for schools over the longer
Labour will maintain free entry to:-_.. term. We will put creativity back at museums and invest in our museums;_.. the heart of the curriculum, reviewing and heritage sector. Conservative; the EBacc performance measure cuts to the Arts Council and localae usto make sure arts are not sidelined authorities have created a very.. ao. from secondary education.
tough financial climate for museums, with some closing or reducingLabour will launch a creative careers advice campaign in schools to
CHAPTER O9 LEADING RICHER LIVES95demonstrate the range of careersAnd we will introduce an ‘agent and opportunities available, andof change’ principle in planning the skills required in the creativelaw, to ensure that new housing industries, from the tech sector todevelopments can coexist with theatre production. existing music venues.
Being a performer is a great career. We all need to work harder to keep
But too often the culture of low orchildren safe online. Labour will no pay means it isn’t an option forensure that tech companies are those without well-off families toobliged to take measures that further support them. We will work withprotect children and tackle online trade unions and employers to agreeabuse. We will ensure that young sector-specific advice and guidelinespeople understand and are able on pay and employment standardsto easily remove any content they that will make the sector moreshared on the internet before they accessible to all. turned l8.
We will improve diversity on and offscreen, working with the film industry and public service and commercial broadcasters to find rapid solutions to improve diversity.
We recognise the serious concern about the ‘value gap’ between producers of creative content and the digital services that profit from its use, and we will work with all sides to review the way that innovators and artists are rewarded for their work in the digital age.
Music venues play a vital role in supporting the music industry's infrastructure and ensuring a healthy music industry continues in Britain.
Labour will review extending the
£l, OOO pub relief business rates scheme to small music venues.
96FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWM E D IATo protect democracy and media afreedom, we will take steps to
The BBC is a national asset whichensure that Ofcom is better able to.
we should all be proud of. Unlikesafeguard a healthy plurality of media the Conservatives, Labour willownership and to put in place clearer. rules on who is fit and proper to own always support it and uphold..
a: or run TV and radio stations.
its independence. We will ensure the BBC and public service broadcasting has a healthy future.
Labour is committed to keeping
Channel 4 in public ownership and will guarantee the future of
Welsh-language broadcaster S4C.
Victims of phone hacking have been let down by a Conservative government that promised them justice, but failed to follow through. We will implement the recommendations of part one of the Leveson Inquiry and commence part two which will look into the corporate governance failures that allowed the hacking scandal to occur.
Local newspapers and broadcasting in Britain are an important part of our democracy and culture.
We are concerned about closures of local media outlets and the reductions in number of local journalists. Labour will hold a national review local media and into the ownership of national media to ensure plurality.
CHAPTER O9 LEADING RICHER LIVES97\ My! a Pet )
«< -ya
“Zz.
Dhy
« oh
~TM 4
-rs? s
*Iin;
»>:.-- -“oe ie at it ade rae Xp AN ie Se 4 POSTE Rea Sane Taek
Ce ee ee eae tO ee hn OE ON eeS PO RTThe broken ticketing market in the esUK means tickets sell out instantly
Sport must be run in the interestsand are put up at vastly inflated of those who participate in it andprices on ticket-tout websites. Labour love it, not just for a privileged few. will enforce anti-bot legislation and
We will give football supportersimplement the recommendations of the opportunity to have a greaterthe Waterson Review to ensu re fair say in how their clubs are run. opportunities for fans to buy tickets.
We will legislate for accredited supporters trusts to be able to appoint and remove at least two club directors and to purchase shares when clubs change hands.
We will review fan participation in sports governance more widely.
Sporting events must be open and accessible to all. We will push sports authorities to make rapid improvements on access provision for fans with disabilities.
Labour will ensure the Premier
League delivers on its promise to invest 5 per cent of its television rights income into the grassroots game to help the next generation of players and coaches, and to improve facilities and pitches. The Premier
League has so far failed to do so, despite lucrative new domestic and international TV deals.
CHAPTER O9 LEADING RICHER LIVES99lOOFOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWEXTENDING
DEMOCRACYEXTE NDI N GThis is about where power and asovereignty lies - in politics, the
DEMOCRACYeconomy, the justice system, and in aour communities.
As we change ourThe Convention will look at extending constitutional relationship with democracy locally, regionally and
Europe, we must also adjustnationally, considering the option our own arrangements. Just asof a more federalised country.
many felt that power was too y. POur fundamental belief is that centralised and unaccountable. the Second Chamber should be in Brussels, so many feel that;. democratically elected. In the about Westminster.,;; interim period, we will seek to
A Labour government will establish aend the hereditary principle and
Constitutional Convention to examinereduce the size of the current House and advise on reforming of the wayof Lords as part of a wider package
Britain works at a fundamental level. of constitutional reform to address the growing democratic deficit
We will consult on its form&: g across Britain.
and terms of reference and invite recommendations onWe will extend the Freedom of extending democracy. Information Act to private companies that run public services.
lO2FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWWe will reduce the voting age to l6. ENGLAND
At l6, you are eligible to pay tax, getes married or even join the army. We need a relationship
You deserve a vote.:
of equals with devolved
We will safeguard our democracyadministrations. Labour will by repealing the Lobbying Act, create a role for a Minister which has gagged charities, andfor England, who will sit introduce a tougher statutoryunder the Secretary of State register of lobbyists. for Communities and Local
Government, and will work with the Secretaries of State for Scotland, Wales and
Northern Ireland.
We will restore regional offices to increase contact between central and local government on the ground.
Labour will be guided by public opinion when determining whether to include directly elected mayors in future devolution deals.
CHAPTER lO EXTENDING DEMOCRACYlO3aNau t
SCOTLANDWe will set up an inquiry into ablacklisting and will urge the Scottish
Government to hold an inquiry into
Labour opposes a second.;;.
Scottish independencethe actions of Scottish police during: the miners’ strike.
referendum. It is unwanted and unnecessary, and we will campaign tirelessly to ensure Scotland remains part of the UK. Independence would lead to turbo-charged austerity for Scottish families.
The Scottish Parliament will receive a huge funding increase from our policies, and massive numbers of
Scots will benefit from our plans in areas reserved to Westminster.
We will establish a Scottish
Investment Bank, with £2O billion of funds available to local projects and
Scotland’s small businesses, creating work and stimulating the economy.
lO4FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEW--- ee te ee a a) en
‘I -; MeLAI) apePS.# z -,
2S Se Rare Spee 2G PIR Sa eat ere
WALESWe will bring forward legislation to eemake the devolution settlement more sustainable as set out by the Welsh
We are proud of theid.. Labour government in its Alternative achievements of the Welsh
Wales Bill, including the devolution
Labour government and... of policing.
its record of delivery. In government, we will work in partnership to stand up for the people of Wales and protect public services.
We need long-term reform of how the UK allocates public expenditure to ensure that it reflects the needs of different parts of our country and that no nation or region of the UK is unfairly disadvantaged.
We will build on the Development
Bank of Wales using more than £lO billion from Labour's new National
Investment Bank.
CHAPTER lO EXTENDING DEMOCRACYlO5ee Cees teas a
NORTHERN
IRELAND
The peace we have today in
Northern Ireland is due to the courageous endeavours of those on all sides who have been brave enough to build it.
The Good Friday Agreement, which
Labour helped to negotiate, is one of the greatest achievements of
Labour in office.
We will continue to fully support the principles and structures inherent within the Good Friday Agreement and we remain committed to working with all sides to deliver real peace and greater prosperity to Northern Ireland.
lO6FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWA MORE
EQUAL SOCIETYA MORE EQ UALDevastating cuts to the Equality oSand Human Rights Commission by
SOCI ETYthe Conservatives reveal their real eoattitude, beyond the rhetoric, to. issues of equality and discrimination.
The Labour Party is the partyquay;.. These cuts have been made amid of equality and seeks to build a__,;. the rise in hate crime recorded by society and world free from all.. waethe police in the last year. A Labour forms of racism, anti-Semitism. government will enhance the powers and Islamophobia. Labour has;._. and functions of this commission, a strong record on progressing__,.
Toutmaking it truly independent, to women’s rights and freedoms;; ensure it can support ordinary that we can be proud of.;; working people to effectively
Labour brought in the Equal Paychallenge any discrimination they
Act, the Sex Discrimination Act, may face. A Labour government will the Equality Act, the Minimumreinstate the public sector equality
Wage and introduced Sure Start. duties and seek to extend them to
Every progressive piece of equalitythe private sector, ensuring legislation has been deliveredall citizens benefit from this by Labour. Labour legislation.
Under the Conservatives, progress is being rolled back for women, people with disabilities, LGBT people and
BAME communities. Cuts to public services and social security are landing disproportionately on women and ethnic minorities, with 86 per cent of the money raised from the
Tories’ tax and social security changes coming from women’s pockets.
It was a Labour government that enshrined the rights and freedoms contained in the European
Convention on Human Rights into
UK law, marking the birth of the
Human Rights Act.
lO8FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEW-.
jI,,
&ad
WOM ENLabour will continue to ensure rea woman's right to choose a safe,. legal abortion - and we will work
The advances for women in; oewith the Assembly to extend that
Britain and around the world right to women in Northern Ireland.
have been fought and won by determined women workingViolence against women and girls together for real change, oftencontinues to be a global epidemic, in the face of resistance andaffecting an estimated one in three even abuse. women worldwide. In the UK, on average two women are killed b
Labour has a proud record on: 8y. Lstheir current or a former partner progressing women’s rights and;: every week. Under the Conservatives, freedoms. We brought in the Equal;.
Coover a third of all local authority
Pay Act, the Sex Discrimination Act,.:._funding to domestic and sexual the Equality Act, the Minimum Wage;.;, violence services was already cut and introduced Sure Start. Ours will by 2Ol2.
be a government for women, with a cabinet of at least 5O per centLabour will appoint a new women, which fights inequality andcommissioner to enforce misogyny in every part of society. minimum standards in tackling. domestic and sexual violence.
A Labour government will gender.;.; oeA Violence Against Women audit all policy and legislation_.
aeCommissioner would also provide for its impact on women before:.; stable central funding for women’s implementation.
CHAPTER ll A MORE EQUAL SOCIETYlO9refuges and rape crisis centres and encourage sharing of best practice between local authorities.
Maternity discrimination under the Conservatives is out of control, almost doubling in the past ten years.
Many mothers are reluctant to raise complaints about discrimination and unfair treatment. Unlawful maternity and pregnancy discrimination is now more common in Britain's workplaces than ever before, with
54, OOO pregnant women and new mothers forced out of their jobs in
2Ol5. Labour will reverse the unfair employment tribunal fees which literally price people out of justice.
Labour will also extend the time period for applying for maternity discrimination to the employment tribunal from three to six months.
Labour will work with the Health and Safety Executive to make mandatory a workplace risk assessment for pregnant women so necessary adaptions can be made, and review support for women who have miscarriages.
llOFOR THE MANY NOT THE FEW< -_;.
LG BT EQUALITYLabour will bring the law on LGBT
SShate crimes into line with hate crimes based on race and faith, by makin
Labour has a proud record3ace ana rath by MaKing.. them aggravated offences.
of championing the fight for
LGBT equality. We abolishedTo tackle bullying of LGBT young
Section 28, equalised thepeople, Labour will ensure that all age of consent, created civilteachers receive initial and ongoing partnerships, and it was onlytraining on the issues students face through Labour votes thatand how to address them. And we equal marriage became law. will ensure that the new guidance
However, there is still a longfor relationships and sex education way to go on issues such asis LGBT inclusive.
education, equal access tooo;.. Likewise, we will ensure all public services, levels of LGBT;;
Ffrontline health and social care hate crime, and mental and;;;.. professionals receive ongoing physical wellbeing. i training to understand and meet
A Labour government will reformthe needs of LGBT patients and the Gender Recognition Act and theservice users. Labour will ensure
Equality Act 2OlO to ensure theythat NHS England completes the protect Trans people by changing thetrial programme to provide PrEP as protected characteristic of ‘genderquickly as possible, and fully roll out assignment’ to ‘gender identity’ andthe treatment to high-risk groups to remove other outdated languagehelp reduce HIV infection.
such as ‘transsexual’.
CHAPTER ll A MORE EQUAL SOCIETYlllDIVE RSEalready acting on recommendations, aincluding reform of internal
CO M M UN ITI ESdisciplinary procedures to make them firmer and fairer, and expansion of training to tackle anti-Semitism. On
Now more than ever, we need a matter of such importance, Labour to celebrate the profound;.; and enriching transformationurges all democratic political parties:. to do the same.
brought by the diversity of people in this country, withWe will end racism and discrimination all their different experiences, against Gypsy, Roma and Traveller talents and contributions. communities, and protect the right
Today Black and Asian-ownedto lead a nomadic way of life.
businesses are an important andBlack and Asian workers still suffer growing feature of our economya massive pay gap. By introducing and society. These businesses areequal pay audit requirements on important not just because of theirlarge employers, Labour will close financial contribution; they have alsothis pay gap. By making the Minimum helped transform particular sectorsWage a real Living Wage, we will of the economy. benefit ethnic minority workers who
The Labour Party is the party ofare more likely to be on low pay.
equality. We seek to build a societyWe will implement the Parker Review free from all forms of racism, anti-recommendations to increase ethnic
Semitism and Islamophobia. diversity on the boards of Britain's
We should all be deeply troubledlargest companies.
by the rise in racially aggravated attacks and race hate crime in the past year. Anti-Semitic incidents are also on the rise once more and we are committed to combatting this trend with adequate resources and firm political will.
Commissioning a report on our own party was an unprecedented step in British politics, demonstrating a commitment to tackling prejudice wherever it is found. Labour is ll2FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWPEOPLE WITHlegislate to make terminal illness a ooprotected characteristic under the
DISABILITIESEquality Act.
Autism covers a wide range of
Over the last seven yearsconditions that reflect neurological people with disabilitiesdifferences among people. We will have been failed by thework with employers, trade unions
Conservative government. and public services to improve
People with disabilities have beenre ovorkplace and i society n vilified with divisive rhetoric like:
‘scroungers’ and ‘shirkers’. In thisLabour will give British Sign climate, recorded disability hateLanguage full recognition as crime has increased. a recognised language.
Last year the UN published a report concluding that the Conservative government had committed “grave, systematic violations of the rights of persons with disabilities”.
Currently 4.2 million People with disabilities live in poverty in Britain, and the disability employment gap remains stubbornly high.
Labour believes in the social model of disability - that it is society which disables people, and it is our job to remove those barriers. The previous
Labour government signed the UN
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD). The next
Labour government will sign the
UNCRPD into UK law.
Labour will act to tackle discrimination, remove barriers and ensure social security delivers dignity and empowerment, not isolation and stigma. Labour will
CHAPTER ll A MORE EQUAL SOCIETYll3ll4FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWA GLOBAL BRITAINLabour will take all necessary7 measures to protect the securityge Se of our citizens and country. We will ee put conflict resolution and humanig ee ee rights at the heart of foreigntos. ee“* policy, commit to working through the UN, end support for unilateral... why our response to these challenges aggressive wars of intervention;.; must be different. We cannot seek and back effective action to;;. to solve the world’s problems on alleviate the refugee crisis.; our own, but instead must exhaust
Unlike the Conservatives, Labourdiplomatic solutions alongside believes Britain's foreign policyinternational, regional and local should be guided by the valuespartners within the framework of of peace, universal rights andinternational law.
international law. Today, these valuesoo.; This will require a modern are being tested. As we leave the.;,;; and inclusive strategy, uniting
European Union, keeping Britain;:;.; the interwoven foreign policy global is one of our country’s most::
instruments of diplomacy, urgent tasks.
defence and development.
We face the most complex, interwoven security and development challenges of our time; ongoing wars across the Middle East, unprecedented numbers of refugees, global terrorism, climate change, the threat of nuclear conflict, a devastating food crisis across East
Africa and beyond, an erratic US administration and a more combative government in Russia.
The lessons of the past, including those from the Chilcot Inquiry, show ll6FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWDIPLOMACY>
Labour recognises that, in leaving8 the EU, Britain will face both challenges and opportunities.
We are deeply ambitious for our‘\ country’s future and will draw on our international networks;:
to make Britain a champion of\ multilateral engagement.‘ I
We will invest in the UK'sNI \\ diplomatic services, rebuilding\ ' I \\\\ some of the key capabilitieswal peal lost as a result of Tory cuts.:
Since the Second World War,..
_.:. Labour is strongly committed to
Britain’s most important diplomatic.;:.: reducing human suffering caused relationship has been with the..... by war. We will publish a strategy for
US. But that special relationship. oo..:.; protecting civilians in conflict, setting is based on shared values. When..
_.; out detailed plans for work on conflict the current Trump administration:.; prevention and resolution, postchooses to ignore them, whether by: aa oo,.. conflict peacebuilding, and justice discriminating on the basis of religion.; ow, for the victims of war crimes. Labour or breaking its climate change_;.; has created a Minister for Peace and commitments, we will not be afraid::; Disarmament to lead this work.
to disagree.
Labour is committed to a
From the Middle East to Africa, in.:.
va: comprehensive peace in the Middle recent years millions of people have;: a. East based on a two-state solution been killed, injured or displaced;; aasecure Israel alongside a secure through wars, terrorism and military..... and viable state of Palestine. There intervention. In Syria alone, morecan be no military solution to this than 4OO, OOO people have been killed.; ry:.; conflict and all sides must avoid
Labour will work tirelessly to end..;.; taking action that would make peace the conflict and get the diplomatic;. harder to achieve. That means both process back on track, while fully.
oo. an end to the blockade, occupation supporting international efforts to:.. and settlements, and an end to investigate, prosecute and convict the.. rocket and terror attacks. Labour will perpetrators of war crimes.;..
continue to press for an immediate
CHAPTER l2 A GLOBAL BRITAINll7return to meaningful negotiationsand the rule of law. We will review leading to a diplomatic resolution. all training and equipment contracts
A Labour government willwith repressive regimes, to ensure immediately recognise the statethat Britain never colludes in the of Palestine. mistreatment of civilians.
We will also urge negotiationsWe will always stand up for the rights, towards a political resolution in allinterests and self-determination of other regions currently experiencingBritain’s overseas territories and conflict, including Kashmir, Libya, their citizens, whether protecting the
Nigeria, Sudan, South Sudan, Somaliasovereignty of the Falkland Islands and Yemen, and give our strongagainst anyone who would seek to support to those countries alreadychallenge it, or supporting the right working to end decades of division, of the Chagos islanders to return to including Colombia, Cyprus and thetheir homelands.
Democratic Republic of Congo... a,..
We will reclaim Britain's leading role in
In other regions, including the Koreantackling climate change, working hard
Peninsula and the South China Sea, to preserve the Paris Agreement and rising tensions threaten global peace. deliver on international commitments
Under a Labour government, Britainto reduce emissions while mitigating will work to reduce those tensionsthe impacts of climate change on through an insistence on multilateraldeveloping countries.
political dialogue
While strengthening our commitment
From Afghanistan and Iraq toto the UN, we also acknowledge its the streets of European cities, shortcomings, particularly in light of
Daesh continues to commit actsrepeated abuses of the veto power by of indiscriminate barbarism. Wesome permanent members of the UN will take all lawful action necessarySecurity Council. We will work with to counter and confront this evil, our international partners to build and we will advocate a long-termsupport for UN reform and make multinational political strategy, led byits institutions more effective and regional actors, to tackle the spreadresponsive. We will appoint dedicated of extremism. global ambassadors for women's
In our discussions with differentrights, LGBT rights and religious..: freedom to fight discrimination and governments, including China,.
Egypt, the Gulf States, Myanmar, thepromote equality globally.
Philippines, Russia and Turkey, we will urge respect for human rights ll8FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWExports, trade and investment play a vital role in creating jobs and growth in Britain, and Labour supports the considerable contribution that a responsible, world-leading defence and security industry makes to the UK economy. However, we also believe that strong export controls have a vital role to play in sustaining a legitimate trade in arms, while protecting UK jobs and R&D.
Labour will therefore implement the
Arms Trade Treaty to a consistently high standard, including ceasing arms exports to countries where there is concern that they will be used to violate international humanitarian law (IHL).
In particular, Labour will demand a comprehensive, independent, UNled investigation into alleged violations of
IHL in Yemen, including air strikes on civilians by the Saudi-led coalition. We will immediately suspend any further arms sales for use in the conflict until that investigation is concluded.
Labour remains committed to an independent inquiry into Britain’s military role in the l984 raid on the
Golden Temple in Amritsar.
CHAPTER l2 A GLOBAL BRITAINll9DEFENCEwith the EU on a range of operational amissions to promote and support
The primary duty of anyglobal and regional security.
government is to protect andThe last Labour government defend its citizens. We live inaconsistently spent above the NATO period of growing internationalbenchmark of 2 per cent of GDP.
tensions. A strong, viable andConservative spending cuts have put sustainable defence and securityBritain’s security at risk, shrinking policy must be strategic andthe army to its smallest size since evidence led. the Napoleonic wars. The scrapping... of Nimrod, HMS Ark Royal and the
As previous incoming governmentsi,.
have done, a Labour government willHarrier jump-jets have weakened order a complete strategic defenceour defences and cost British:;: taxpayers millions.
and security review when it comes into office, to assess the emergingLabour's commitment to spending at threats facing Britain, includingleast 2 per cent of GDP on defence hybrid and cyber warfare. Cyberwill guarantee that our Armed Forces security will form an integral part ofhave the necessary capabilities to our defence and security strategyfulfil the full range of obligations, and we will introduce a cyber-securityand ensure our conventional forces charter for companies working withare versatile and able to deploy ina the Ministry of Defence. range of roles.
We will ensure that our armedLabour supports the renewal of forces are properly equippedthe Trident nuclear deterrent. As a and resourced to respond tonuclear-armed power, our country wide-ranging security challenges. has a responsibility to fulfil our
Labour will commit to effective UNobligations under the Nuclear Nonpeacekeeping, including support forProliferation Treaty. Labour will lead a UN Emergency Peace Service. multilateral efforts with international. partners and the UN to create a
As the security threats and challenges. nuclear-free world.
we face are not bound by geographic borders, it is vital that as BritainThe UK defence industry is worldleaves the EU, we maintain our closeleading, and Labour will continue to relationship with our Europeansupport development and innovation partners. Alongside our commitmentin this sector and to ensure that it can to NATO, we will continue to workcontinue to rely on a highly skilled l2OFOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWworkforce. We are committed to aautonomy over their housing choices, procurement process that supportsand review and improve the Forces the British steel industry and defenceHelp to Buy scheme.
manufacturing industry, which in_..8; ryPersonnel who are injured while turn provide good jobs throughout.;;; serving should have prompt access the supply chain. Labour will publish.. to support and compensation. We a Defence Industrial Strategy;;;;;.. will resist any Conservative proposals
White Paper, including a National.:
aato abolish the right to seek legal
Shipbuilding Strategy to secure a;. redress against the MoD where long-term future for the industry,;.
compensation claims cannot be workers and UK defence..
otherwise settled.
We have a duty to properly reward
¥ to properlyWe are fully committed to supporting and remunerate our Armed Forces.:. our veterans. We will promote
Under the Conservatives, our Armed;. greater awareness of the Armed
Forces have been hit by rent rises,; Forces Covenant, seek greater pay restraint, and changes to tax: oo... consistency in its implementation and benefits, putting real pressure:... by public authorities, and promote on service personnel and their. oo a.. increased participation in the families. We will ensure they get the ws. Corporate Covenant.
pay and living conditions that their service merits. We will also roll out a Homes Fit for;. Heroes programme that will insulate
Dedicated service personnel are.. the homes of disabled veterans at the heart of our defence policy.
ay.: for free.
Labour will immediately examine recruitment and retention policies in order to stem the exodus seen under the Conservatives. We will publish new strategic equality objectives to ensure our personnel reflect our diverse society.
We will drive up standards in Service
Accommodation, and take action where private companies have failed to deliver. We will consult with service personnel, giving them greater
CHAPTER l2 A GLOBAL BRITAINl2lD EVE LO Pp M E NTresolution and of human rights, which ais why they will be at the heart of
Labour's foreign policy.
Labour has a proud record on&N policy international development. The Conservatives have completely
We will continue to spendfailed to show any leadership on
O.7 per cent of gross nationalthis issue. In the first lOO days of income on official developmentgovernment, we will produce a assistance, and develop a targetedcross-departmental strategy to meet development agenda based onour international obligations on the the principles of redistribution, refugee crisis.
social justice, women’s rights and.. The current global tax system is poverty reduction.;_,; deeply unjust. Africa’s economies
Labour will take robust action to endalone lose more than £46 billion the self-regulation of Departmentannually through corruption and tax for International Developmentevasion - more than lO times what private contractors, establishing andthey receive in aid. Labour will act enforcing new rules to ensure aid isdecisively on tax havens, introducing used to reduce poverty for the many, strict standards of transparency for not to increase profits for the few. crown dependencies and overseas territories, including a public
We fully support the Sustainable.5} P.
register of owners, directors, major
Development Goals (SDGs) agreed.. shareholders and beneficial owners globally to eradicate poverty and; ffor all companies and trusts.
protect the environment. Labour will develop a cross-governmentWe will work in partnership with strategy for ensuring the SDGs arecommunities in the Global South implemented, and report annually toto develop long-term strategies
Parliament on our performance. for strengthening economies and societies. We would reinstate the
In the wake of Brexit, to fulfil ourI:. i, Civil Society Challenge Fund to national obligations under the:;. support trade unions, women’s
SDGs, Labour will guarantee the.;;. associations and other civil society least developed countries continuedon:
organisations which are the most access to the UK market to protect: oo
Feffective forces in winning human vital export revenues.; a rights and workers’ rights.
There are more refugees and displaced..
Jobs in global supply chains can people around the world than at any;;; be of enormous importance to time since the Second World War...;.; working people across the Global
This is a failure of diplomacy, conflict l22FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWI
Tia.
I': ee, A,
South, but human rights abuses andAt least a billion people around exploitation of lower environmentalthe world cannot currently obtain standards and workers’ rights arethe health services they need, and too common. Labour is committed toanother lOO million are pushed ensuring respect for human rights, below the poverty line as a result workers’ rights and environmentalof paying for their services. We will sustainability in the operations ofestablish a Centre for Universal
British businesses around the world, Health Coverage, providing and we will work to tighten the rulesglobal partnerships, support and governing corporate accountabilityencouragement to countries that for abuses in global supply chains. want UHC, helping them to generate
Labour will work with business tothe funding and systems required
_. for its delivery.
ensure the provisions of the Modern
Slavery Act are fully respected, We will invest in new public-health including reporting on due diligencedriven research and development in supply chains. We will extendto find effective and affordable the remit of the Groceries Codetreatments for diseases in the
Adjudicator beyond direct suppliersdeveloping world, including fighting to ensure fair treatment for all thoseTB, malaria, HIV/AIDS and neglected producing goods for the UK's largesttropical diseases.
supermarkets.
CHAPTER l2 A GLOBAL BRITAINl23l24FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEWPAIN TYME PPI TE VV PWR PPE WiAINT wW FOR THE MANY NoTTHE FEW FO
W FOR THE MANY NOTTHE FEW FQ wW FOR THE MANY NoTTHE FEW FO
W FOR THE MANY NOTTHE FEW FQ
W FOR THE MANY NOTTHE FEW FC9548_l7 Promoted by lain McNicol, General Secretary, the Labour Party, on behalf of the Labour Party, both at Southside, lO5
Victoria Street, London, SWlE 6QT. Printed by Potts Print, Nelson Park, 6 Moorland Way, Cramlington, Northumberland, NE23 lWG.