IT’S TIME FOR
REAL CHANGE
FOR THE MANY NOT THE FEW
*dLabourCONTENTS
FOREWORD BY JEREMY CORBYN6
A GREEN INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION9
ECONOMY AND ENERGYil
TRANSPORTl9
ENVIRONMENT22
ANIMAL WELFARE25
REBUILD OUR PUBLIC SERVICES27
FUNDING29
NHS AND SOCIAL CARE3l
NATIONAL EDUCATION SERVICE37
POLICE AND SECURITY42
JUSTICE46
COMMUNITIES AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT49
FIRE AND RESCUE52
DIGITAL, CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT53
TACKLE POVERTY AND INEQUALITY57
WORK59
WOMEN AND EQUALITIES65
MIGRATION7O
SOCIAL SECURITY72
HOUSING77
CONSTITUTIONAL ISSUES8l
THE FINAL SAY ON BREXIT87
THE FINAL SAY ON BREXIT89
A NEW INTERNATIONALISM93
A NEW INTERNATIONALISM95
EFFECTIVE DIPLOMACY97
DEFENCE AND SECURITYlOO
INTERNATIONAL SOLIDARITY AND SOCIAL JUSTICElO3This election will shape our country forWe can do better than this. How can a generation. It is your opportunity toit be right that in the fifth richest transform our country, so that it workscountry in the world, people’s living not just for a few, but for all of us. Itstandards are going backwards and life is a chance to deliver the real changeexpectancy is stalling?
Britain needs. This manifesto sets out: oo.. The Conservative Government is failing.
how a Labour government will do that.:
It has failed on the economy, on the
Some people say this is the Brexitclimate crisis, on investment for the election. But it’s also the climatefuture, on public services and on Brexit.
election, the investment election, theIt is simply not working for most people.
NHS election, the living standards...; A Labour government will unlock the election, the education election, the:;.; potential of all those held back for too poverty election, the fair taxes election.: J ao; long. Labour will be on your side.
Above all, it’s the change election.
to.. Labour will rewrite the rules of the
It's time to take on the vested intereststhat itks f economy, so that it works for everyone.
holding people back. The last decade: J::; J
_. We will rebuild our public services, by has seen a wealth grab by a privileged.. taxing those at the top to properly fund few, supported by the Conservatives,.. the services we all rely on.
at the expense of the majority. The big polluters, financial speculators andWe will launch the largest-scale corporate tax-dodgers have had a freeinvestment programme in modern ride for too long. times to fund the jobs and industries of;:: athe future, so that no one is held back
Labour will build a fairer Britain that::.
and no community left behind. This is a cares for all, where wealth and power fully costed programme to upgrade our are shared.
economy and transform our country.
I am not prepared to continue to seea..... We will kick-start a Green Industrial more families without a proper home::; Revolution to tackle the climate and more people queuing at food banks.; emergency by shifting to renewable or sleeping rough on the streets.. eo.
energy, investing in rail and electric
I am not prepared to put upcars, and making housing energywith communities blighted by lackefficient, to reduce fuel poverty and of investment, endless cuts to vitalexcess winter deaths.
services and millions struggling to make ends meet, while tax cuts are handed to the richest.
6IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEvif_--aa(I in,\)I 'it'I
I Bae li- I - i;
> IT’S HMEFOR REALTene. CHANGE FOR THE MANY, afy P OR _*¥
NOT THE FEW: TOGETHER; PY+aes
E CAN DELIVER ITCaer eo ss
TMmiVP-
’aeeeeee
¢}‘:,,:4
We will create a million climate jobsWe will end food bank Britain, and lift in every region and nation of thechildren and pensioners out of poverty.
UK - good, skilled jobs that will bringa.. We will bring in a Real Living Wage of prosperity back to parts of our country at least £lO per hour for all workers neglected for too long.;;
- with equal rights at work from day
We will bring rail, mail, water and energyone on the job. We will end insecurity into public ownership to end the greatand exploitation by ending zero-hours privatisation rip-off and save youcontracts and strengthening trade money on your fares and bills. union rights.
We will deliver full-fibre broadbandLabour will create a National Education free to everybody in every home inService to provide support and our country by creating a new publicopportunity throughout your life: from service, boosting the economy, Sure Start centres to top-quality early connecting communities and puttingyears education; well-funded schools money back in your pocket. with lower class sizes to free university
FOREWORD7tuition with no fees; and free lifelongpower in the hands of the many. Boris learning, giving you the chance toJohnson's Conservatives will look after reskill throughout yout life. the privileged few.
Labour will give the NHS the fundingThis manifesto offers the chance of it needs, end privatisation, and neverreal change for every generation and let our health service be up for grabs inevery community. When Labour wins, any trade negotiation. We'll expand ourthe nurse wins, the pensioner wins, the
NHS to offer free prescriptions for allstudent wins, the office worker wins, the and free basic dentistry, building on itsengineer wins. We all win.
founding principles. We can and we must do better
We will end the social care crisis thatas a country.
has left l.5 million elderly people.
without the care they need. Labour willThis is our last chance to tackle the climate emergency.
fund free personal care for older people and extra care packages. The future is ours to make. It’s time for,;-o., real change - for the many, not the few.
I’m really worried by the rise in crime.,: Together, we can deliver it.
- and the fact that the most serious violent crime has risen even further. We will reverse a decade of cuts to police[a fe and vital public services that havea):
shown you simply can’t keep peopleJeremy Corbyn safe on the cheap. Leader of the Labour Party
Labour will protect our security at home and abroad. After years of failed foreign interventions and wars, we will end the
‘bomb first, talk later’ approach and instead have a foreign policy based onThis manifesto deals both with Labour’s.. policies which apply across the United peace, justice and human rights. Kingdom and, where responsibilities
And we will get Brexit sorted in sixhave been devolved, it also sets out months by giving people the finalour policies for England.
say - with a choice between a sensibleIn devolved areas such as health, leave deal or remain. We will implementeducation and local government, whatever the British people decide. Labour's detailed policies for
Scotland and Wales are set out
The choice could not be clearer at thisin the manifestos published by election. Labour will put wealth andour Walsh and Scottish parties.
8IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEA GREEN
INDUSTRIAL
REVOLUTION<
7- - 7 I,. -wre - I. i ie eed3 nai ‘nae is eee J a
- en - -_ )a. - - aaI " J, o 4 riF ‘
- al~I. a_.«. i - aa\¥. i
> ECONOMY AND ENERGY
This election isWe must confront this change while dealing with about the crisisthe growing inequality and insecurity in Britain.
of living standardsLabour led the UK Parliament in declaring a climate and the climateand environmental emergency. The next Labour and environmentalgovernment will lead the world in fighting it, with a emergency. Whetherplan to drive up living standards by transforming our we are ready or not, economy into one low in carbon, rich in good jobs, we stand on the brinkradically fairer and more democratic.
of unstoppable change.
PPgThe climate crisis ties us all into a common fate. This election is our best hope to protect future generations from an uninhabitable planet. The Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change has said we need to cut global emissions in half by 2O3O to have a chance of keeping global heating within safe limits - that means acting now, and acting decisively.
The Tories wasted a decade serving the interests of big polluters. Labour will use the crucial next decade to act. The Tories slashed support for renewable energy while pushing through dangerous fracking.
AGREEN INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTIONulNow Britain is decades off course onextensive skills are passed on to vital emissions targets. the next generation of workers.
That’s why Labour will kick-start a GreenWe will show the world how prioritising
Industrial Revolution that will create onesustainability will not only deliver million jobs in the UK to transform ourimmediate improvements to everyone’s industry, energy, transport, agriculturelives but also offer humanity a pathway and our buildings, while restoringto a more equitable and enlightened nature. Our Green New Deal aims toeconomy: one that protects our achieve the substantial majority of ourenvironment, reins in corporate power, emissions reductions by 2O3O in a wayrevitalises democracy, unites our that is evidence-based, just and thatcommunities, builds international delivers an economy that serves thesolidarity and promises a better quality interests of the many, not the few. of life for all. The scale of the challenge
Just as the original Industrial Revolutionrequires nothing less.
brought industry, jobs and pride toTackling the destruction of our planet our towns, Labour’s world-leadingis a question of justice - for the
Green Industrial Revolution will rebuildcommunities at home and abroad them, with more rewarding, well-paidwho are most affected by it and jobs, lower energy bills and wholefor our children who will bear the new industries to revive parts of ourconsequences if we don’t. Social justice country that have been neglected forwill define Labour’s approach. We will too long. For some, industrial transitionmake sure that the costs of the green has become a byword for devastation, transition fall fairly and are mostly because successive Conservativeborne by the wealthy and those most governments were content to sit backresponsible for the problem.
and leave the fate of whole industries.
2Ol9 saw the blossoming of a global and communities at the mercy of..
market forces. A Labour governmentmovement calling on politicians te will never let that happen. wake up and act on the climate and environmental emergency. Labour
We will work in partnership with thewelcomed that movement and, as a workforce and their trade unionsgovernment in waiting, we have turned in every sector of our economy, soits demands into detailed, credible that they lead the transition in theirplans for real change.
industries, creating new, good-quality jobs and making sure that their
2IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEInvestmentbe mandated to lend in line with our i,. mission to decarbonise our economy
Delivering the far-reaching changehile j; ductivit d while increasing productivity an needed to tackle the climate and; g PJ.;. creating good jobs across the country.
environmental emergency will require a; eae. As well as large-scale national and full mobilisation of national resources,::..; regional projects, smaller loans will both public and private..
be available through our new Post
Labour will create a SustainableBank based in Post Office branches,
Investment Board to bring togetherenabling thousands of bottomup the Chancellor, Business Secretary andtransformational changes by start-ups,
Bank of England Governor to oversee, small businesses, local cooperatives coordinate and bring forward thisand community projects in towns and investment - involving trade unionsvillages up and down the country.
and business. We will ask the Office for.; aan. We will make sure that the Uk’s
Budget Responsibility to incorporate.:.:;;; financial sector is helping to tackle the climate and environmental impactsne oo. emergency rather than fuelling it. We into its forecasts so that the cost of not.:::,;.; will do this by improving the fitness acting will be factored into every;-7._. of our financial authorities to mobilise fiscal decision.:.
green investment and by giving them
The cost of not acting is far greaterpowers to manage the risk to financial than the cost of acting. We will launchstability posed by short-sighted a National Transformation Fund ofinvestment in polluting assets.
£4OO billion and rewrite the Treasury's.. Just lOO companies globally are investment rules to guarantee that: a.;. responsible for the majority of carbon every penny spent is compatible with,,... emissions. We won't be afraid to tackle our climate and environmental targets;;. this wanton corporate destruction by
- and that the costs of not acting are::; taking on the powerful interests that are fully accounted for too. Of this, £25O]::
a. ao. icausing climate change. We will change billion will directly fund the transitiona. the criteria a company must meet to be through a Green Transformation FundJ. listed on the London Stock Exchange dedicated to renewable and low-carbon:.. so that any company that fails to energy and transport, biodiversity and:;;.; contribute to tackling the climate and environmental restoration environmental emergency is delisted.
We will create a National Investment
Bank, backed up by a network of
Regional Development Banks, to provide £25O billion of lending for enterprise, infrastructure and innovation over lO years. They will
AGREEN INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTIONlBLevelling Up Across the Countryarrangements. They will set priorities for lending, giving every region and nation
Many parts of Britain would need9, gIVINGured::
_.;; a new and powerful lever to rebuild their this investment even without a climate:. economy on their own terms.
and environmental emergencu. Years of under-investment and neglectWe will shift the political centre by Westminster have left too manyof gravity by placing the National communities feeling powerless andTransformation Fund Unit, a key part of too many areas left behind with low-the Treasury, in the North of England quality jobs, weak productivity andand build up the regional offices of slow growth. government in each of the nine English.. regions to coordinate government
The climate and environmental.:.. policies at the regional level, as well as emergency is a chance to unite the:..; ensuring a regional voice in Whitehall.
country to face this common challenge by mobilising all our national resources, both financial and human. But we will. Energy only succeed by ensuring that everyone shares in the benefits. Labour will makeEnergy use in buildings accounts for sure that investment is spread evenly56% of the Uk’s total emissions, making across the whole country and will giveit the single most polluting sector. We powers and funding to every region andwill develop the recommendations nation of the UK. of our ‘3O by 2O3O’ report to put the as. UK on track for a net-zero-carbon
We will bring about a radical-. oOo., energy system within the 2O3Os - and decentralisation of power in Britain so:.
go faster if credible pathways can that local people and communities are;;.. be found. We will deliver nearly 9O% given far greater control over their own.: of electricity and 5O% of heat from lives and prospects.
renewable and low-carbon sources
A Local Transformation Fund in eachby 2O3O.
English region will be used exclusively..... We will build:
to fund infrastructure projects decided at a local level, as will devolved- 7, OOO new offshore wind turbines governments in Wales, Scotland:::+ 2, OOO new onshore wind turbines and Northern Ireland. Our Regional
Development Banks will be governed+ Enough solar panels to cover 22, OOO by boards made up of key localfootball pitches.
stakeholders such as local chambers of..+ New nuclear power needed for energy commerce, trade unions and councillors:. security.
- with Scotland, Wales and Northern lreland empowered to make similar
4IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEWe will trial and expand tidal energyOwnership and invest to reduce the costs of:..:
We will not achieve the promise of a fair renewable and low-carbon hydrogen;.;; and sustainable economy if we repeat production. We will upgrade almost;;_the mistakes of the carbon era, when all of the UK’s 27 million homes to the;. the capture of a natural resource for highest energy-efficiency standards,.;; private profit created a vastly unequal reducing the average household energy;-; and polluting economy dominated by bill by £4l7 per household per year by; aepowerful vested interests.
2O3O and eliminating fuel poverty. We will introduce a zero-carbon homesIt’s not just carbon. From the standard for all new homes. depletion of fish stocks to the ae. burning of the Amazon, profit has
As part of heat decarbonisation, we will oo. proved a poor regulator for use of roll out technologies like heat pumps, our natural resources.
solar hot water and hydrogen, and invest in district heat networks usingWhether it is the trillions of litres of waste heat. water lost through leakages, barriers to renewable energy connecting to the
To balance the grid, we will expand. ae oYg.:_grid or the billions of pounds of billpower storage and invest in grid,;;.. payers’ money being siphoned off in enhancements and interconnectors.7 dividends to wealthy shareholders,
We will expand distributed andTory privatisation of our utilities has community energy, and immediatelybeen a disaster for both our planet and and permanently ban fracking. our wallets.
We will support energy workersWe will put people and planet before through transition and guarantee themprofit by bringing our energy and retraining and a new, unionised job onwater systems into democratic public equivalent terms and conditions. ownership. In public hands, energy and ae.. water will be treated as rights rather than
We will introduce a windfall tax on oil. J:.; commodities, with any surplus reinvested companies, so that the companies thatJ_.... or used to reduce bills. Communities knowingly damaged our climate will::_;: themselves will decide, because utilities help cover the costs. We will provide a,.; won't be run from Whitehall but by strategy to safeguard the people, jobs;
‘service-users and workers.
and skills that depend on the offshore oil and gas industry. Public ownership will secure democratic control over nationally strategic infrastructure and provide collective stewardship for key natural resources.
AGREEN INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION5In the case of energy, it will also helpWhenever public money is invested deliver Labour’s ambitious emissionsin an energy generation project, the targets. Whereas private networkpublic sector will take a stake and return companies have failed to upgrade theprofits to the public.
grid at the speed and scale needed, publicly owned networks will accelerate and coordinate investment to connectIndustry and Innovation renewable and low-carbon energy while.:.;; Averting climate catastrophe offers working with energy unions to support;..
_. huge economic opportunities.
energy workers through the transition. oo,:
But Britain will only benefit from
Under Labour's plans: a Green Industrial Revolution with;. the right policies.
* Anew UK National Energy Agency will own and maintain the national gridOver the past three decades, Britain has infrastructure and oversee the deliveryreduced its emissions at the expense of our decarbonisation targets. of domestic industry by offshoring;; production. This is an accounting trick,
* l4 new Regional Energy Agencies;.. o. not a solution. It does not protect the will replace the existing district::::
climate, is unfair to other countries network operators and hold statutory:..
ae. and it damages jobs and communities responsibility for decarbonisingth at home.
electricity and heat and reducing fuel poverty. Labour will take full responsibility for our
--carbon footprint instead of passing the
- The supply arms of the Big Six energy.....: buck. We will instruct the Committee companies will be brought into public...; on Climate Change to assess the ownership where they will continue to..;; emissions the UK imports as well as supply households with energy while.
J; those it produces, and recommend helping them to reduce their.;::
policies to tackle them, including making energy demands.::
UK industry the greenest in the world.
The Conservatives allowed the:.; The Conservatives have presided over a proceeds of North Sea oil to beI. lost decade of productivity and allowed squandered on tax cuts for the richest._-.; Britain to fall behind in the green and captured in profits for the few,;.;;.. technologies of the future. Labour will instead of investing them in our future.::
make sure this never happens again.
We now stand at an even greater crossroads in the development of ourTargeted science, research and national economy. Under Labour, ourinnovation will be crucial to tackling the green future will be owned by all of us. climate crisis, dealing with the plastic l6IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEwaste filling our oceans and addressingsectors and supply chains and creates other societal challenges, such ashundreds of thousands of good, an ageing population and antibioticunionised jobs here at home.
resistance. As part of our plan to usher:.;.. We will use the power of public in a Green Industrial Revolution, Labour...;;; procurement to strengthen local jobs will create an innovation nation, setting...
and supply chains and will require all a target for 3% of GDP to be spent on: oo.
companies bidding for public contracts research and development (R&D) by:;:..; to recognise trade unions, pay suppliers
2O3O. We will achieve this target by;-..; on time and demonstrate equalities increasing direct support for R&D and...; best practice.
reforming the innovation ecosystem to better ‘crowd in’ private investment. As we transition, we will ensure the UK’s.;. automotive sector isn’t left behind by
We will establish a Foundation:.: oe;;. the electric revolution by investing in
Industries Sector Council to provide.:
three new gigafactories and four metal a clean and long-term future for our.; i.. oo. reprocessing plants. By supporting existing heavy industries like steel::. UKmade electrical steel we will ensure and glass and fund R&D into newer oo. robust support for an end to end UK technologies like hydrogen and carbon.; supply chain. We'll also take on the capture and storage, global plastics crisis by investing in a
A thriving steel industry will be vitalnew plastics remanufacturing industry to the Green Industrial Revolution. creating thousands of jobs, ending
Labour will support our steel throughexports of plastic waste and reducing public procurement, taking action onour contribution to ocean pollution.
industrial energy prices, exempting new;.;.‘.: Labour’s progressive trade strategy will capital from business rates, investing.... a. be aligned with our industrial strategy in R&D, building three new steel::;;. to help develop the industrial base recycling plants and upgrading existing.;;:. needed to deliver high-quality exports production sites.:.
and the decent jobs that go with them.
We will ensure that new technologiesLabour will champion exports from aren't just invented here, but arethe environmental goods and services engineered, manufactured andsector, building on the 3OO, OOO jobs exported from here. We will putthat the sector already sustains. We
British innovation at the heart ofwill uphold the highest environmental our procurement to support localand social regulations in all our trade sourcing and reshoring, so that everyrelations, and will never downgrade investment we make strengthensstandards as ‘barriers’ to trade.
our manufacturing and engineering
AGREEN INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION7I
Skillswill be topped up with any surplus}..; raised through Inclusive OwnershipI
Our Green Industrial Revolution will; i. Funds and made accessible to noncreate at least one million well-paid, na busiI evy-paying businesses.
unionised jobs in the UK. We will trainsPauing people in the skills they need to accessTargeted bursaries will be available to these jobs of the future. women, BAME people, care leavers, eye_ex-armed forces personnel, and people
Britain’s skills crisis has grown under: oo;.; with disabilities to encourage them to the Tories. The Apprenticeship Levy;.;. take up climate apprenticeships - the has been beset by problems, leaving. STEM of the future.
employers paying into a training budget they are unable to spend. And it isWe will further help small businessesI not delivering for small businesses. by increasing the amount that can,
We cannot afford to carry on like this. be transferred to non-levy-paying... employers to 5O% and introducing
Labour will make it easier for employers:.:
i, an online matching service to help to spend the levy by allowing it to be..;;; levy-paying businesses find smaller used for a wider range of accredited::
en. conbusinesses to transfer their funds to.
training, in line with guidelines set by the Institute for Apprenticeships and
Technical Education and government’s wider priorities for the economy.
We will launch a Climate Apprenticeship programme to enable employers to develop the skills needed to lead the world in clean technology.
Under this programme, employers will be expected to allocate 25% of the funds in their Apprenticeship
Levy accounts to training Climate
Apprentices. These funds can be spent directly or allocated to a ring-fenced
Climate Apprenticeship Fund, which l8IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGE~iniia ss lB &;, bs~ _ iwan has d bow icc” ) lOO% electric I*
O Ae; a alge 7si: UD OATa2 ii. I mA:
W]iiT
Labour will build aCutting emissions will drive our transport policies. We sustainable, affordable, will review public expenditure on transport to ensure accessible and integrated that it promotes environmental sustainability and transport system, contributes to decarbonisation.
founded on the principle. PPBus services have been devastated by the that transport is an; J;... Conservatives, despite carrying more people than any essential public service. J:
other mode of public transport. Women are especially dependent on buses, which also provide a lifeline for both older and younger people and for many economically disadvantaged groups.
Labour will ensure that councils can improve bus services by regulating and taking public ownership of bus networks, and we will give them resources and full legal powers to achieve this cost-effectively, thereby ending the race to the bottom in working conditions for bus workers. Where councils take control of their buses, Labour will introduce free bus travel for under-25s. We will increase and expand local services,
AGREEN INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTIONl9reinstating the 3, OOO routes that havedeliver rail electrification and expansion been cut, particularly hitting ruralacross the whole country, including in communities. Wales. We will ensure that these major. oo, infrastructure projects are a model
Labour will deliver improvements for;._; of good employment practice and rail passengers by bringing our railways;;.;. pay due regard to the environmental back into public ownership, using.' impact.
options including franchise expiry. ThisP will enable us to make fares simpler andWe will promote the use of rail freight more affordable, rebuild the fragmentedin order to reduce carbon emissions, air railways as a nationally integratedpollutants and congestion on the roads public service, cut the wastage ofand expand the provision of publicly private profit, improve accessibility forowned rail freight services.
disabled people, ensure safe staffinga.... We will increase the funding available levels and end driver-only operation..: an for cycling and walking. We will bring
Our publicly owned rail companytogether transport and land-use will steer network planning andplanning to create towns and cities investments. It will coordinatein which walking and cycling are the mainline upgrades, resignalling, best choice: safe, accessible, healthy, rolling stock replacement and majorefficient, economical and pollutionprojects. We will implement a full, free. We will help children’s health and rolling programme of electrification. well-being by ensuring street designs
Our model will ensure continuity ofprovide freedom for physically active skills, jobs and supply chain capacityoutdoor play and by introducing to reduce costs, improve productivitymeasures to ensure the zones around and support the economic benefits ofour schools are safer, with cleaner air.
Labour’s Green Industrial Revolution..
Our transport programme is focused on
We will introduce a long-termcreating better, publicly accessible local investment plan including deliveringtransport systems. By improving public
Crossrail for the North as part oftransport, Labour will help people to improved connectivity across thebecome less reliant on their cars, for our northern regions. We will consult withbetter health, for a cleaner environment local communities to reopen branchand to improve quality of life in our lines. We will also unlock capacitytowns and cities. The Conservatives and extend high-speed rail networkshave committed to ending new sales of nationwide by completing the fullcombustion engine vehicles by 2O4O.
HS2 route to Scotland, taking fullLabour will aim for 2O3O.
account of the environmental impacts:.;.; We will position the UK at the forefront of different route options. We will of the development and manufacture
2OIT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEof ultra-low emission vehicles and will support their sale. We will invest in electric vehicle charging infrastructure and in electric community car clubs.
We will accelerate the transition of our public sector car fleets and our public buses to zero-emissions vehicles.
We will reform taxi and private hire services, including a review of licensing authority jurisdictions, setting national minimum standards of safety and accessibility and updating regulations to keep pace with technological change and to close loopholes to ensure a level playing field.
We will adopt an ambitious
Vision Zero approach to UK road safety, striving for zero deaths and serious injuries. Labour will invest to make our neglected local roads, pavements and cycleways safer for the everyday journeys of both drivers and vulnerable road users. We will review all tolled crossings.
Labour recognises the Davies
Commission's assessment of pressures on airport capacity in the South East.
Any expansion of airports must pass our tests on air quality, noise pollution, climate change obligations and countrywide benefits. We will examine fiscal and regulatory options to ensure a response to the climate crisis in a way that is fair to consumers and protects the economy.
We will take action to end nationalitybased discrimination in seafarer pay.
AGREEN INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION2l- a; avere -_-
-+ jaa’ a al,+: P.
A Labour government’sWe are facing a climate and environment emergency,
Green Industrialand unlike the Tories we will not trade our environment
Revolution isin pursuit of reckless trade agreements.
complemented b
PJLabour will review and improve protected area our Plan for Nature.;;;. designations, from National Parks to local nature
Our commitments. reserves and urban green spaces.
to ecosystem repair and environmentalWe will introduce a Climate and Environment protections work handEmergency Bill setting out in law robust, binding in hand with sustainablenew standards for decarbonisation, nature recovery, jobs and industries, andenvironmental quality and habitats and species social justice. protection.
We will maintain and continuously improve the existing EU standards of environmental regulation.
A Healthy Environment
Our polluted air contributes to over 4O, OOO premature deaths a year and poisons our environment, with
22IT'S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEfurther impacts on children’s health. ButWe will establish a new environmental the Conservatives’ air-quality measurestribunal to ensure that administrative are so inadequate they have beendecisions are consistent with found to be illegal. environmental and nature-recovery obligations.
Labour will introduce a new Clean Airg
Act, with a vehicle scrappage scheme and clean air zones, complying withLand
World Health Organisation limits for fine particles and nitrous oxides. Land is a public good, but it is not a.. icommon asset. In l979, 2O% of land
We will provide an extra £5.6 billion:;;. was owned by the public sector.
in funding to improve the standard
Today, that has halved.
of flood defences and respond to the increased risk of flooding, Green Belts protect one tenth of our prioritising areas at risk in Northland and offer conservation of some
West England, Yorkshire and the Eastof our natural environment. Introduced
Midlands that have been neglectedby Labour in l947 to provide access by Conservative investments. to the countryside, they are threatened by developments.. A Labour government will maintain
Nature Restoration.
agricultural and rural structural funds
Our Plan for Nature will set legallybut repurpose them to support binding targets to drive the restorationenvironmental land management of species and habitats. and sustainable methods of food roduction.
We will embark on an ambitiousP programme of tree planting, with bothWe will invest in more county farms to forestry and native woodland species. replace those lost, and will work with.. agricultural organisations to increase
We will fully fund the Environment::.. access into farming for new entrants.
Agency and other frontline environment agencies, and improve upstream river management.
Food
We will create new National Parks:.. A quarter of all food purchased is alongside a revised system of other;... wasted every year, equivalent to over protected area designations, which.. ee oe2O million tonnes of greenhouse gas will guard existing wildlife sites and.:_.; JJemissions, costing over £2O billion.
join up important habitats, while also ensuring more people can enjoy livingYet Britain has an epidemic in foodcloser to nature. related ill health, obesity, malnutrition
AGREEN INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION23and diabetes, as well as increased foodWaste and Recycling insecurity - with a boom in food bank..:
Waste, including plastic waste, pollutes use and record levels of hunger._ our land and seas, killing wildlife and
Labour will introduce A Right to Food. contaminating our food.
We will end ‘food bank Britain’. We will:.
We will make producers responsible ensure everyone has access to healthy, oe; for the waste they create and for nutritious, sustainably produced food. J:. a. the full cost of recycling or disposal,
We will halve food bank usage within:.:
encouraging more sustainable design a year and remove the need for them;-.. and manufacturing. In government in altogether in three years. We will... Wales, Labour has transformed the establish a National Food Commission_.::.. position of recycling, placing them in and review the Allotments Act. We.:.; the top five globally for recycling rates.
will make food security a reason to°..; A UK Labour government will learn intervene in the economy and work with;;; afrom Wales’ example, and will also local councils to minimise food waste back bottle-return schemes.
We will put farmers, fishers, fooda.
We will invest in three new recyclable producers and workers at the heartJ::
asteel plants in areas with a proud history of our plans for delivering healthy;. of steel manufacturing.
food locally. We will support local food networks, expand access to farm holdings and ensure rights of union representation for all food and agricultural workers. We will reestablish an Agricultural Wages Board in England so every part of the UK is covered.
We will set maximum sustainable yields for all shared fish stocks, redistribute fish quotas along social and environmental criteria and, if people vote to leave the EU, require the majority of fish caught under a UK quota to be landed in
UK ports.
We aim to achieve net-zero-carbon food production in Britain by 2O4O.
24IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEAw X
‘<-4
4wae.> >.
ft “44a>Imr
4seAe\e
F“yar -7 \oa
*2, j _5 aa bese. Ri ane eeif i_
--ae:: aSthiomgiel a 2 es< aaa2ad
The Conservatives willLabour has published an ambitious animal welfare sacrifice animal welfaremanifesto which reiterates our commitments to standards in trade dealsprohibit foxhunting and end the cull of badgers.
with other countries. a:. In England, we will introduce an animal welfare
They threaten to bring, a. commissioner, prohibit the sale of snares and glue back fox hunting and are;... traps, end the badger cull and ban the keeping of pursuing the ineffective;;..
primates as pets. We will work internationally to end badger cull - the. commercial whaling, ban the importation of hunting largest destruction of;;.. trophies of threatened species, and boost police a protected species inco.. resources to tackle rural and wildlife crime.
living memory.
AGREEN INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION2526IT'S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEREBUILD
OUR PUBLIC
SERVICES
29 ~FUNDING
3lNHS AND SOCIAL CARE
37NATIONAL EDUCATION SERVICE
42 ~__- POLICE AND SECURITY
46 JUSTICE
49 COMMUNITIES AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT
52 FIRE AND RESCUE
53 -_- DIGITAL, CULTURE, MEDIA AND SPORT
27~-
Universal public services, I Public services do more than make sure everyone collectively providedhas the basics. They create shared experiences and through general taxation - strengthen social bonds. They make our lives richer and and free at the point ofmore fulfilling.
use for all, are how we.;. A decade of Tory cuts has pushed our public services guarantee the right to a;.
diifto breaking point. Labour offers real change - we ood life.
9will make Britain’s public services the best and most extensive in the world.
We will pay for this by creating a fairer taxation system, asking for a little more from those with the broadest shoulders, and making sure that everyone pays what they owe.
We will reverse some of the Tories’ cuts to corporation tax while keeping rates lower than in 2OlO.
We'll ask those who earn more than £8O, OOO a year to pay a little more income tax, while freezing National
Insurance and income tax rates for everyone else.
REBUILD OUR PUBLIC SERVICES29We will end the unfairness that seesOur most valuable assets are the income from wealth taxed at lowerdedicated people who work in rates than income from work. VAT isour public services, but under this a regressive tax that hits the poorestgovernment their pay has been cut in hardest and we guarantee no increasesreal terms. Labour will restore public in VAT. sector pay to at least pre-financial
We will launch the biggest evercrisis levels (in real terms), by delivering crackdown on tax avoidance andyearon-year above-inflation pay rises,.:. starting with a 5% increase, to reward evasion and reform the inefficient.. and retain the people who do so much system of tax reliefs.
for us all.
Public services must also be accountable. Labour will end the current presumption in favour of outsourcing public services and introduce a presumption in favour of insourcing. And we will stop the public getting ripped off by taking back all
PFI contracts over time.
When services are procured from the private sector, companies will be assessed against best practice public service criteria, including provisions for collective bargaining, fair wage clauses, adherence to environmental standards, effective equalities policies, full tax compliance and application of pay ratios. In the public sector, we will enforce maximum pay ratios of 2O: l.
We will repair the damage the Tories have done to our social fabric, with a £l5O billion Social Transformation
Fund to replace, upgrade and expand our schools, hospitals, care homes and council houses. Public buildings will be modernised to ensure a reduction in their carbon footprint.
3OIT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEa ae
The National HealthA decade of Tory health cuts and privatisations has
Service is one of Labour’s - pushed our greatest institution to the brink. Our proudest achievements. hospitals are crumbling, equipment is outdated, IT
The right to freeat-systems are inadequate and community facilities the-point-ofuseare neglected.
healthcare, universal anda, oo. There are lOO, OOO staff vacancies in NHS England, comprehensive inscope,... ca. including a shortage of 43, OOO nurses. There are is socialism in action.:.
l5, OOO fewer hospital beds. Every winter, bed occupancy rates exceed dangerous levels. Patients now wait far too long to see their GP, for an ambulance or for treatment.
Our immediate task is to repair our health services.
Our urgent priority is to end NHS privatisation.
Our mission is to create the conditions to prevent illness and enable people to live longer, healthier lives.
REBUILD OUR PUBLIC SERVICES3lQuality Care for Alland to ensure future decisions are a.; transparent and balanced fairly
A Labour government will invest in the;:.; between every region. We will complete
NHS to give patients the modern, well-. J:.. the confirmed hospital rebuilds and resourced services they need. We will;:;:.. invest more in primary care settings, increase expenditure across the health; modern Al, cyber technology and sector by an average 4.3% a year. This;;;; stateof-the-art medical equipment, investment enables us to end patient:; including more MRI and CT scanners.
charges, guarantee the standards of healthcare patients are entitled toWe will ensure data protection for receive from NHS England, invest inNHS and patient information, a highly education for the health workforce andvaluable publicly funded resource that restore public health grants. can be used for better diagnosis of;. conditions and for ground-breaking
Our investments mean we deliver the:-.. research. We will ensure NHS data is not standards of care enshrined in the NHS.:::... exploited by international technology
We will stabilise our overstretched A&E:; aeand pharmaceutical corporations.
departments. We will improve stroke, heart disease and cancer survival ratesWe will uphold the principle of by providing earlier diagnosis andcomprehensive healthcare by providing improved screening rates. We will call afree annual NHS dental check-ups.
moratorium on bed cuts. We will guarantee universal healthcare aeby ensuring women’s and children’s
Every penny spent on privatisation and:.. health services are comprehensive, outsourcing is a penny less spent on...: by protecting the rights of EU workers, patient care. Labour will end and reverse; ee. other migrants and refugees and by privatisation in the NHS in the next:;;. ensuring all our services are made
Parliament. We will repeal the Health:.. accessible to BAME, LGBT+ and and Social Care Act and reinstate the:::
cecedisabled patients. We will end responsibilities of the Secretary of.;. mixed-sex wards.
State to provide a comprehensive and universal healthcare system. We will endWe will ensure our NHS becomes a netthe requirement on health authorities tozero-carbon service with an NHS Forest put services out to competitive tender. of one million trees, more efficient
We will ensure services are deliveredheating and insulation systems, greater inhouse and also bring subsidiaryreliance on renewable energy, including companies back inhouse. We will haltmore solar panelling and a transition to the fire sale of NHS land and assets. electric paramedic vehicles, NHS fleet... cars and hybrid ambulances.
We will publish an infrastructure plan to return NHS England to the international average level of capital investment
32IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEWe will introduce mandatory standardsTo support our transition to community for NHS inpatient food and will providehealth care services, we will expand GP free hospital parking for patients, stafftraining places to provide resources for and visitors.27 million more appointments each year and ensure community pharmacy is supported.
Joinedup Care
As medical technologies advance, a:.. Mental Health we will live with a wider array of chronic conditions. Health and careA Labour government will provide must become more joinedup, morean additional £l.6 billion a year to accessible, more personal and moreensure new standards for mental preventative. health are enshrined in the NHS. constitution ensuring access to
We will stop Tory plans to further;.:. treatments is on a par with that entrench the private sector delivery;.
for physical health conditions.
of health care under the cover of integration plans set out in the NHSOur mental health hospitals are not fit
Long Term Plan. Instead we will join up, for purpose. Over l, OOO people with integrate and coordinate care throughmental health problems face hospital public bodies. stays in old, dormitory-style hospital: wards, while less than one in four
A Labour government will develop a.
_. A&E departments have the facilities planned model of joinedup community;,;;; to deal with people experiencing a care, enabling people to live longer lives._... mental health crisis. We will invest in better health in their own homes. We_.:...£2 billion to modernise hospital facilities will ensure the voices of local people::; and end the use of inappropriate, and NHS staff are heard in future outof-area placements.
developments of the health system..; The legislation for detaining people
We will allocate a greater proportion of;: ae. with learning disabilities and mental overall funding to closeto-home health.:-. a. ow. illnesses is outdated. We will implement services and build interdisciplinary,:;;.. in full the recommendations set out in patient-focused services across;;.. the independent review of the Mental primary care, mental health and social.;.;. Health Act, so that people are given care. We will ensure patients in deprived.
_.: choice, autonomy and the treatment and remote communities will have.; they need.
better access to primary care services.
We will also ensure those living withWe will invest more in eating disorders long-term conditions can access theservices and ensure NICE guidelines on care they need. eating disorders are implemented.
REBUILD OUR PUBLIC SERVICES33We will improve access to psychologicalbreastfeeding support and therapies to ensure they deliver theintroduce mental health assessments quality care patients deserve. We willin a maternal health check six weeks ensure provision of 24/7 crisis services. after birth.
Only one in four children and youngWe will invest in children’s oral health, people are able to receive help from atackle childhood obesity and extend mental health professional. Our £845the sugar tax to milk drinks. We will million plan for Healthy Young Minds willban fast-food restaurants near schools more than double the annual spendingand enforce stricter rules around the on children and adolescent mentaladvertising of junk food and levels of health services. salt in food. We will take actions to.. significantly reduce infant deaths and
We will establish a network of openi:
ensure families who lose a baby receive access mental health hubs to enable;. appropriate bereavement support as more children to access mental health:. awell as protections at work.
and recruit almost 3,5OO qualified counsellors to guarantee every childThe reemergence of measles is an access to school counsellors. indictment. We will urgently put in place a vaccination action plan to regain our measles-free status in WHO listings.
Inequalities::
We will fully fund sexual health services
Life expectancy is stalling and infantand roll out PrEP medication.
mortality rates are increasing, especially; oo,. We will address drug-related deaths, among those living in our most deprived ialcohol-related health problems and communities...
the adverse impacts of gambling
A Labour government will target aas matters of public health, treated reduction in health inequalities withaccordingly in expanded addictiona comprehensive children’s healthsupport services. Alcoholic drinks will strategy. We will introduce a Futurebe labelled with clear health warnings.
Generations Well-being Act, enshriningWe will review the evidence on health aims in all policies and a newminimum pricing.
duty for NHS agencies to collaboratea as. We will implement a Tobacco with directors of public health.:
Control Plan and fund smoking
We will invest more than £l billion incessation services.
public health and recruit 4,5OO more health visitors and school nurses. We will increase mandated health visits, ensure new mothers can have access to
34IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEWorkforceThe Orkambi cystic fibrosis drug is just;_the latest example of patients held
A Labour government will end the crisis;:.. to ransom by corporations charging in our health and care services, plan for:;::
extortionate prices for life-saving drugs.
the future and guarantee real-terms pay rises every year. We will establish a generic drug company. If fair prices are rejected for
Agenda for Change terms andpangP: J
_.. patented drugs we will use the Patents conditions will be put into law.;. oa, Act provisions, compulsory licences and alongside safe staffing limits for all; a. research exemptions to secure access staff. We will invest, train and develop:: oe. to generic versions, and we will aim to
NHS staff throughout their careers.;:
a._increase the number of pharmaceutical
We will introduce a training bursary::.. jobs in the UK.
for nurses, midwives and allied health professionals. We willWe will play an active role in the remove the obstacles to ethicalmedical innovation model, ensuring international recruitment. rewards and incentives match the areas;. of greatest health need.
A Labour government will review the tax and pension changes implemented byWe will ensure that all parts of the the Tory government to ensure that theNHS, the treatment of patients, the workforce is fairly rewarded and thatemployment of staff and medicine services are not adversely affected. pricing are all fully excluded and rotected from any international
We will provide mental healthP4. trade deals.
support for staff and create a working environment within the NHS that isWe will progress clinically appropriate safe, flexible and free from harassment, prescription of medical cannabis.
bullying or violence
We will abolish prescription charges in England.
Medicine
Under a Labour government theSocial Care
NHS will be at the forefront of the.:. Social care funding cuts have left l.5 development of genomics and cell.:..; million older people without the care therapies so that patients can benefit they need.
from new treatments for cancer and dementia, whilst ensuring theAlmost £8 billion has been lost from
UK continues to lead in medicalsocial care budgets since 2OlO. This is developments. having a profound impact on unpaid carers in this country, with 2.6 million
REBUILD OUR PUBLIC SERVICES35I carers quitting their jobs to provide carefunded care packages, improve the to family members. The current carestandard of care provided to them and system is at risk of collapse. remove the distinction between health and care needs.
A Labour government will build a comprehensive National CareThe provision of additional care}
Service for England. We will providepackages also means we can support community-based, person-centredautistic people and people with support, underpinned by the principleslearning disabilities to move out fromI of ethical care and independent living. inappropriate inpatient hospital settingsI
We will provide free personal care, and provide support in their own homes} beginning with investments to ensure:::.. Our National Care Service will work in that older people have their personal-;; ipartnership with the NHS, ensuring care care needs met, with the ambition:.‘;_is delivered for people, not for profit.
to extend this provision to all-:. Contracts for providing care will not working-age adults. on be awarded to organisations that do
We will develop eligibility criteria thatnot pay their fair share of taxes and do ensures our service works for everyone, not meet our high standards of quality including people with complexcare. Our focus will be on the ethical conditions like dementia. We willdelivery of care that ensures growing ensure no one ever again needs to facepublic sector provision and providers catastrophic care costs of more thanwho meet standards of transparency,
£lOO, OOO for the care they need in oldcompliance and profit capping.
age, which we will underscore with a oo. ooNearly one and a half million people lifetime cap on personal contributions:
work in the care sector, but there are to care costs..; over lOO, OOO vacancies. Labour will
We will also invest in other social careinvest to end the social care crisis, end packages to reverse the damage donel5-minute care visits and provide care by Conservative cuts and provideworkers with paid travel time, access to additional care packages to supporttraining and an option to choose regular both older people and working-agehours. We will increase the Carer’s adults living independently in theirAllowance for unpaid full-time carers.
own homes.
Our investments in social care services will enable us to more than double the number of people receiving publicly
36IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEI RES Upos guide >: set
7 IqT]A&“ of) ~ fo Es ay
/4a I5iy;>.7 a >ES iBE pan aaa t
NATIONAL EDUCATION SERVICE:
Education makes ourBut education isn’t just vital to our economy - it lets economy stronger, people develop their talents, overcomes injustices and our society richerinequalities and helps us understand each other and and our people moreform social bonds.
fulfilled. Whether it is... oo. The Conservatives have starved our education system businesses finding people..... of funding, transferring costs onto students, staff and with the right skills, a~;;. communities. They have lost sight of its value.
tech startup making our economy more dynamicFrom cutting budgets of schools, disproportionately or more people in betterin deprived areas, to closing Sure Start centres paid work and able toand underfunding support for those with special contribute to publiceducational needs and disabilities, Conservative services, we all benefitpolicy has meant those in most need have lost out.
from an educated society.;.;;;
That’s why our National Education Service will be at the heart of Labour’s plan for real change. It will provide free education for everyone throughout their lives and will nurture every child and adult to find a path that’s right for them, by promoting all types of learning, skill and knowledge - technical, vocational, academic and creative.
REBUILD OUR PUBLIC SERVICES37Early Yearsand to ensure that childcare provision ow, accommodates the working patterns
Early years education is vital to;,: of all parents.
children’s development. Children from disadvantaged backgrounds startWe will improve child development by falling behind their peers before theytransitioning to a qualified, graduateeven start school. Early years educationled workforce. We value the experience also helps parents - usually mothersof current early years workers, and will
- by providing a bridge betweenoffer free training to the workforce to maternity/parental leave and school. attain these qualifications on the job.
But the current system falls far shortAchieving this vision will require of what is needed. One thousand Suresignificant investment. We will increase
Start centres have closed since 2OlO, funding and end the fragmentation while the Tories’ socalled free childcareof the current system by funding offer is desperately underfundedproviders directly, making things and excludes many of the mostsimpler and more sustainable for disadvantaged children. both parents and providers.
We will reverse cuts to Sure Start andWe will recruit nearly l5O, OOO additional create a new service, Sure Start Plus, early years staff, including Special with enough centres to provide aEducational Needs Coordinators, and genuinely universal service, availableintroduce a national pay scale, driving in all communities, focused on theup pay for the overwhelmingly under2s. female workforce.
Labour will radically reform early yearsMaintained nursery schools provide a provision, with a two-term visionproven, high-quality service but they to make high-quality early yearsare under threat from Tory cuts. We will education available for every child. Weprovide sustainable, long-term funding will also extend paid maternity leave toto secure their future.
l2 months.
Within five years, all 2, 3 and 4year-.. Schools olds will be entitled to 3O hours of free preschool education per week andLabour will make sure schools are access to additional hours at affordable, properly resourced with increased longsubsidised rates staggered withterm funding, while introducing a fairer incomes. Labour will also work to extendfunding formula that leaves no child childcare provision for lyear-oldsworse off. We will invest to upgrade schools that have fallen into disrepair.
38IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGELabour's funding settlement will ensureeducational needs and disabilities, who pupils are taught by a qualified teacher, have endured years of cuts and chaos.
that every school is open for a full fiveLabour will provide the necessary days a week, and maximum class sizesfunding for children with special of 3O for all primary school children. Weeducational needs and disabilities.
will also fund more non-contact time...;
Labour will end the ‘high stakes for teachers to prepare and plan..
testing culture of schools by
Schools have faced years of budgetscrapping Key Stage l and 2 SATs cuts, leaving headteachers forcedand baseline assessments, and to beg parents for money for basicrefocussing assessment on supporting equipment. Despite promising topupil progress.
reverse their own cuts, the Tories latesta.:. We will introduce an Arts Pupil Premium funding announcement leaves 83% of;.; to fund arts education for every schools still facing cuts next year..:;.
primary school child. We will review the
Schools are being subjected tocurriculum to ensure that it enriches intensified testing, inspection, leaguestudents and covers subjects such as tables and competition. These aren'tblack history and continues to teach improving pupil achievement orissues like the Holocaust. Pupils will narrowing the attainment gap, butlearn both the science of climate and are contributing to a growing teacherenvironmental emergency, and the recruitment and retention crisis. skills necessary to deal with them.
The narrowing curriculum isWe will end the fragmentation and denying many children access tomarketisation of our school system by modern languages, arts and music, bringing free schools and academies or technical and engineering skillsback under control of the people who that will be essential in a worldknow them best - parents, teachers shaped by climate change. and local communities.
The academies system isUnder our system:
over-centralised, inefficient and.; a+ Budget and dayto-day decisions undemocratic. Parents, communities.
will be transferred back to schools, and even teachers are shut out of.. overseen by an accountable governing decisions about schools and vulnerablebodu with electedtati ody with elected representatives.
children are being let down. And there4P is no evidence that academies deliver+ Responsibility for delivery of education and better results. support for young people will sit with local.; authorities, they will manage admissions.
The Conservatives have failed a.;.. and have responsibility for school places, generation of children with special.:
including the power to open schools
REBUILD OUR PUBLIC SERVICES39* Oversight and coordination, includingWe will bring back the School Support of continuous, peerto-peer schoolStaff Negotiating Body and national improvement modelled on the Londonpay settlements for teachers.
Challenge, will be carried out by:;.. We will close the tax loopholes enjoyed regional offices of the NES.;; by elite private schools and use that
- All schools will be subject to amoney to improve the lives of all common rulebook, set out inchildren, and we will ask the Social legislation. Justice Commission to advise on integrating private schools and creatin
We will replace Ofsted and transferggP.: g aa;. a comprehensive education system.
responsibility for inspections to a new body, designed to drive school improvement..
Further Education
A new teacher supply service will tackleand Lifelong Learning the waste of funds going to private.;. With automation and the Green supply teacher agencies thanks to:. a.
i. Industrial Revolution bringing major the government's failure to recruit and;.:; changes to industry, it is more retain experienced teachers.:
important than ever that people have
We will take action to end ‘off-rolling’, the opportunity to retrain and upskill removing the perverse incentives forthroughout their lives.
schools to let pupils fall out of the..: Under the Tories, adult education system, by making schools accountable. has undergone lO years of managed for the outcomes of pupils who leave;. decline. England already faces a their rolls.:.
shortage of people with higher-level
We will properly regulate all educationtechnical qualifications, and demand providers and reform alternativefor these skills will only grow as we provision (AP) to ensure an excellentcreate new green jobs.
education is the right of every child, and. a.. Instead of investing in people to improve the outcomes and life chances.. prepare them for the jobs of the future, of some of the most vulnerable children:;.; the Conservatives have slashed funding in society..
and cut opportunities.
We will ‘poverty-proof’ schools,::.. Labour will ensure fairness and introducing free school meals for all; a:;:; sustainability in further education, primary school children, encouraginglianina the bte of, aligning the base rate of per-pupi breakfast clubs, and tackling the cost ofg: g; P P ip. funding in postl6 education with school uniforms..;
Key Stage 4, providing dedicated capital funding to expand provision
4OIT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEand bringing back the EducationHigher Education
Maintenance Allowance as the Welsh..-
Under the Tories, universities are
Labour Government has done...
treated as private businesses, left
Labour will make lifelong learning aat the mercy of market forces, while reality, giving everyone a free lifelongtop salaries soar and students pay entitlement to: more for less. Tuition fees have. trebled and maintenance grants have
* Training up to Level 3.; been scrapped, leaving the poorest
- Six years training at Levels 46, withgraduates with an average debt maintenance grants for disadvantagedof £57, OOO.
learners..:
Labour will end the failed free-market
We will introduce additionalexperiment in higher education, entitlements for workers in industriesabolish tuition fees and bring that are significantly affected byback maintenance grants. We will industrial transition. fundamentally rethink the assessment of research and teaching quality, and
We will make sure training delivers the: 94J.;_. develop a new funding formula for right skills by giving employers a role.:;.. higher education that:
in codesign and coproduction of qualifications.+ Ensures all public HE institutions..; have adequate funding for teaching
We will restore funding for English for and research.
Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) courses and restore and expand the- Widens access to higher
Union Learning Fund, giving workerseducation and reverses the the right to accrue paid time off fordecline of part-time learning.
education and training. a
- Ends the casualisation of staff.
Labour will reform existing careers::... We will transform the Office for advice, working towards an integrated;;.; Students from a market regulator to a information, advice and guidance:;.; body of the National Education Service, system that covers the entire NES. oeI acting in the public interest.
We will reverse the fragmentationa. ee eeWe will introduce post-qualification and privatisation of further and adult. a:
aoo: admissions in higher education, education, incorporating it into a single.:_... and work with universities to ensure national system of regulation that... contextual admissions are used across functions for education as our NHS
_. the system.
does for healthcare provision.
REBUILD OUR PUBLIC SERVICESrTat al:_ ii:4~
Psa-£ 4
*--S " OFFICER-OFFICER
['roF > r,_ 3 aPja4,. -: v4 ---
A~~)4
The primary dutyRecorded crime has risen, including violent crimes of government is tolike knife crime, which has risen to record high levels, keep people safe. Ourup 8O% in the last five years. Last year more than ll communities weremillion crimes were recorded, and the proportion of endangered when theoffences charged has fallen across all categories:
Conservatives tookviolence, drugs, robbery, burglary, weapons possession
2l, OOO police officersand vehicle theft. Prosecutions have fallen to a record off our streets. low level. Some offences have been decriminalised in practice. Only l.4% of reported rapes are prosecuted.
Crime rates reflect the society we live in.
Conservative cuts to services have eroded the fabric of local communities. The rate of school exclusions has increased, as has social inequality
- crime rates are driven by both.
Where the Conservatives have failed, a Labour government will take action to address the causes of crime and end the epidemic. We will invest in our communities and public services to build the stronger,
42IT'S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEfairer society that keeps us all safer. The Tory approach to policing has
Rebuilding our criminal justice services, been different: reckless, remote, we will focus on crime prevention andauthoritarian, ineffective policing early interventions, giving people theon the cheap. It has led to what HM best chance of rehabilitation. Inspectorate of Constabulary described as dangerous, disturbing practices,
We will rebuild our youth services and- g. gP, with investigations shelved, vulnerable guarantee young people's access to.
a. victims let down and dangerous youth workers. We will invest in a youth.
-.. suspects remaining at large.
justice system in which schools, local authorities, health authorities andWe will retain local democratic youth services work together to divertaccountability for police forces and young people away from the pathwaysreform the police funding formula to towards crime. ensure sufficient, sustainable resources are fairly allocated. We will agree resources with the police authorities
Policeto combat crime and restore community policing by consent.
A Labour government will invest in4Pged policing to prevent crime and makeEffective police work requires the police our communities safer, and we willto serve their communities and work enforce the laws protecting policecollaboratively with youth workers, and other emergency workers frommental health services, schools, drug violent assault. rehabilitation programmes and other ublic agencies. A police force workin
We will rebuild the whole policePL. gP;: g.. within our communities, with the workforce, recruiting more police.:;... capacity to gather local intelligence, officers, police community support.;:... is also the frontline of our domestic officers and police staff. We will;:;;. security - the first eyes and ears of reestablish neighbourhood policing;;... effective counter-terrorism.
and recruit 2, OOO more frontline officers than have been planned for by theWe will work to eliminate institutional
Conservatives. We will work with policebiases against BAME communities.
forces to invest in a modern workforceProportionate stop-and-search based to tackle the rise in violent crime andon intelligence is a needed tool of cybercrime under the Tories. To delivereffective policing, but the use of these priorities, Labour will work withexpanded powers means black and police and crime commissioners toAsian men are still more likely to be reform police funding and share newstopped and searched, poisoning resources fairly, and to ensure thatrelations between the police and the local needs are met. local communities they serve.
REBUILD OUR PUBLIC SERVICES43We will ensure better police trainingA Labour government will review our on domestic abuse and offencessecurity strategies.
arising from coercive control, as well:.
or. We will review the Prevent programme as historical abuses and other crimes; to assess both effectiveness and neglected by the reduced forces;._.;; potential to alienate communities operating under Tory austerity and consider alternatives including
A Labour government will establish asafeguarding programmes to protect
Royal Commission to develop a publicthose vulnerable to the recruitment health approach to substance misuse, propaganda and ideologies of the focusing on harm reduction rather thanfar-right and others who promote terror criminalisation. as a political strategy.
We will introduce minimum legalWe will review the Protect programme standards of service for all victimsto ensure that public authorities take of crime. appropriate security measures, without alienating the communities they serve.. We will evaluate the mobile phone
Security trials with the aim of introducing an
We will address the failure of theemergency alert system.
Conservatives to take effective:; We will use our diplomatic services, measures against a growing problem;.;; ooour aid budgets and our international of extreme or violent radicalisation.::.. standing to promote peaceful solutions
We will ensure closer counter terrorism”:.
o.; to conflicts and tackle the risks arising coordination between the police.;. from poverty, natural catastrophes and and the security services, combining.::... population displacements. Our national neighbourhood expertise witha;;;. security is linked to global threats. We international intelligence.;:]:
will respect international law and avoid
We will ensure the powers exercised byneedless military interventions.
the security services are proportionate.;.. Our security cooperation and used in accordance with human.:..;; arrangements with EU neighbours rights. We will review the circumstances; oe. are essential for our safety. If the requiring judicial warrant. We will..:.. British people confirm their decision ensure agencies are accountable anda. to leave, we will prioritise agreement strengthen the powers of the Joint;;.. of a new UKEU Security Treaty.
Intelligence and Security Committee.
We will constrain the right of the Prime
Minister to suppress publication of committee reports.
44IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGECybersecurityBorder Security
Cybercrime and cyberwarfare areOur border security prevents serious growing, all around the world. Everycrimes including child abduction, aspect of our lives, from the NHS topeople trafficking, smuggling of drugs our nuclear facilities, from transportand guns, terrorism and modern systems to communications networksday slavery. The Tories have further is vulnerable. weakened our borders, cutting another
2OO jobs over the last four years.
A Labour government, ever more...
_They have failed to deliver exit checks.
dependent on digital technology,;.; In place of an effective border control will overhaul our cybersecurity by;.__they have required landlords, teachers creating a coordinating minister and...; and medical staff to work as unpaid regular reviews of cyber-readiness.:;:::.
immigration officers, creating a hostile
We will review the role and remit ofenvironment.
the National Cyber Security Centre to.:;.; A Labour government will review determine whether it should be given. our border controls to make them powers as an auditing body, with the.
«more effective.
ability to issue warnings to private and public sector organisations and designate risk.
We will also review the structures and roles of the National Crime Agency, to strengthen the response to all types of economic crime, including cybercrime and fraud, and ensure a modern, technologically advanced police service that has the capacity and skills to combat online crime, supported by a new national strategy on cybercrime and fraud.
REBUILD OUR PUBLIC SERVICES45zz co O gp I;
-a I kfh‘aS
2. ee.€ s:
peea gSeee
Smarter justice requiresWe will champion a joinedup approach, fostering cross-government action - close working relationships between criminal justice to reduce the impactagencies with education authorities, health services of adverse childhoodand others by establishing violence-reduction units experiences and to break - and ensuring vulnerable people get the support they the vicious cycle ofneed by boosting public health, mental health and poverty, inequalityearly years services. Prison is not the best place to and crime. address the drug addictions, mental illnesses and debts that lead many people into crime.
The crisis in our criminal justice system has left communities less safe, victims less supported and people less able to defend their rights. Labour will defend the rule of law.
Cutting thousands of prison officers has driven record levels of prison violence. A Labour government will restore total prison officer numbers to 2OlO levels, and phase out dangerous lone working. We will bring
PFI prisons back inhouse and there will be no new
46IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEprivate prisons. We will tackle the prisonWe will ensure legal aid for inquests maintenance backlog and develop ainto deaths in state custody and the long-term estate strategy. preparation of judicial review cases.. i, We will consult on the civil legal aid
The Ministry of Justice’s own. means-test levels and act on the evidence shows tens of thousands of-;:.. criminal legal aid review.
crimes could be prevented if robust community sentences replace shortWe will defend workers’ ability to prison sentences. We will set newrecover legal representation costs standards for community sentencesfrom negligent employers.
and introduce a presumption against;;.. We will keep the right for workers to prison sentences of six months;; be represented and recover their or less for non-violent and:; costs in cases of employer negligence non-sexual offences.;_::
leading to injury at work. We will review
We will invest in proven alternatives tothe eligibility criteria for the criminal custody, including women’s centres, injuries compensation scheme.
expand problem-solving courts and.;. A Labour government will halt plug the funding gap in the female. court closures and cuts to staff, and offender strategy. We will further;.;. undertake a review of the courts reform consider the evidence for effective:_. aeprogramme. We will facilitate a more alternatives and rehabilitation ofCo:.
-representative judiciary while upholding prolific offenders. ae..
its independence, and review funding
A Labour government will reunifyfor the Crown Prosecution Service.
probation and guarantee a publicly run,:::.: We will tackle the disproportionate locally accountable probation service.::. levels of BAME children in custody,
Under Labour, probation staff and:... review the youth custody estate, professional standards will once again; strengthen youth courts and build be properly valued..
on the Lammy Review.
Legal aid cuts mean essential legal:.... Violence against women and girls is help is too often denied. To help people;;
_. unacceptable as is many women’s enforce their rights, we will restore all; en:. i,. experience of criminal justice agencies.
early legal aid advice, including for.;;;.. We will set new standards for tackling housing, social security, family and.... domestic and sexual abuse and immigration cases..., violence, and appoint a Commissioner
We will recruit hundreds of newfor Violence against Women and Girls.
community lawyers, promote publicWe will establish an independent review legal education and build an expandedinto shamefully low rape prosecution network of law centres. rates. We will establish a National
REBUILD OUR PUBLIC SERVICESa7Refuge Fund, ensure financial stability for rape crisis centres and reintroduce a Domestic Abuse Bill.
We will improve the safety of the family court system for domestic violence victims and prohibit their cross-examination by their abuser.
We will introduce protections for victims of socalled revenge porn. Labour will introduce a nofault divorce procedure.
We will uphold women’s reproductive rights and decriminalise abortions.
We will establish public inquiries into historical injustices including blacklisting and Orgreave, and ensure the second phase of the Grenfell
Inquiry has the confidence of all those affected, especially the bereaved families and survivors. We will also consider a public inquiry in the case of Zane Gbangbola.
We will require judicial warrants for undercover operations and retain the
Mitting Inquiry into undercover policing.
We will release all papers on the
Shrewsbury 24 trials and 37 Cammell
Laird shipyard workers and introduce a Public Accountability Bill. We will ensure fair compensation for the victims of contaminated blood products across the UK.
48IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEIeee eeeeEeEOEOeeeee: at- nl * {-- a.<
I LOCALGOVERNMENT «@ we I iGe..5
Labour will reverse theWhile those who make decisions in Whitehall can seem
Tory decade of austeritydistant and detached, our local councillors live among forlocal governmentand _ us, shopping on the same high street, using the same aim to restore councilparks and leisure centres and sending their children to spending powers to 2OlO - the same schools. Thriving local councils are vital to levels over the lifetime of I Labour’s democratic transformation of the Parliament. the economy.
Councils are the collective voice of local communities and are on the frontline in delivering many essential public services.
Tory cuts, which have been deliberately targeted at the poorest areas of the country, have plunged our councils into crisis and pushed many services to breaking point. Decades of privatisation and outsourcing have hollowed out council capacity, taken money out of communities and undermined democratic accountability.
REBUILD OUR PUBLIC SERVICES49We will act to bring services - from binprotected, that safety standards are collections to management of localmaintained and improved, and that leisure centres - back inhouse withinlocal authority trading standards the next Parliament, improving servicedepartments and other consumer quality, saving money and ensuring theprotection agencies have the resources people who deliver vital local servicesto enforce those rights and standards are treated decently.::
We will stop Crown Post Office closures
Rural councils deliver public servicesand bring Royal Mail back into public differently, and this needs to beownership at the earliest opportunity, reflected in funding allocationreuniting it with the Post Office and mechanisms. We will introduce a ‘rural-creating a publicly owned Post Bank proofing’ process so that all our laws, run through the post office network policies and programmes consider theirto ensure every community has easy impact on rural communities. access to faceto-face, trusted and; affordable banking.
Where local areas experience a sharp rise in demand for services, we will makeA Business Development Agency will be council funding more reactive, and willbased in the Post Bank, providing free work with councils to establish such asupport and advice on how to launch, fund to meet changing circumstances. manage and grow a business.
Our high streets are being decimatedPubs are community hubs but l8 are by store closures and jobs losses. closing each week in Britain. Labour will
High streets are more than places tolist pubs as Assets of Community Value shop, they are places we go for culture, so community groups have the first company and character. We will revivechance to buy local pubs when they high streets by stopping bank branchare under threat.
closures, banning ATM charges and:.:
_We will ensure libraries are preserved giving local government new powers.
for future generations and updated to put empty shops to good use.;,; with WiFi and computers. We will
Business rates are causing real issuesreintroduce library standards so that for high-street retailers and others. government can assess and guide
A Labour government will reviewcouncils in delivering the best the option of a land value tax onpossible service.
commercial landlords as an.:.. As well as the presumption to insource alternative and develop a retail::..:.. public services, we will build community sector industrial strategy.. i wealth by giving communities the
We will make sure the rights ofpowers and resources they need to consumers are enhanced andkeep public spending circulating in
5OIT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEthe local economy, rather than beingof foster parents and regulation of sucked offshore to corporate taxsemi-supported housing, to ensure havens. We will extend communitywe meet the needs of every child.
control in the private sector by:.:..‘We will rebuild early intervention supporting local and community;. a. services and replace the Troubled businesses. We will give a new.;. Families programme with a Stronger
Cooperative Development Agency..; Families programme, refocused on a mission to double the size of the;. long-term support to reduce the risk cooperative sector.. oo, of children going into care.
Labour will put the voices of local::.. We will protect and build on people at the heart of planning. We will;:.. Staying Put for over-l8s in care rebalance power in the planning system;
_and the Adoption Support Fund.
by giving local government greater freedom to set planning fees and by requiring the climate and environmental emergency to be factored into all planning decisions.
Young people have been let down by the Conservatives. At least 75O youth centres have closed since 2Ol2. Too many young people now have nowhere to go, nothing to do and no one to help them with their problems. Labour will build a properly funded, professionally staffed National Youth Service, and will guarantee every young person has access to local, high-quality youth work.
Vulnerable children have suffered most, with many left waiting until crisis point for support. Councils are having to meet the needs of more atrisk children with lower funding.
Labour will launch a wholesale review of the care system, including kinship care, considering national standards such as a central register
REBUILD OUR PUBLIC SERVICES5lI--_
> '.: I»i. -
Se)
Al_
‘\aoa a
FIRE AND RESCUE -
The Conservatives haveA Labour government will halt the cuts and further cut ll,5OO firefighter jobs - invest in our Fire and Rescue Service, recruiting at and closed dozens of fireleast 5, OOO new firefighters. We will learn lessons from stations. Response timesthe public inquiries into Grenfell and earlier disasters.
have got slower and livesWe will establish a broadly based implementation have been put at risk. taskforce, but will not wait for final recommendations to make urgently needed changes. We will ensure dedicated fire controls under Fire and Rescue Service governance and provide resources for a public Fire and Rescue College to ensure that necessary training, research and planning is undertaken.
We will conduct a review of the Fire and Rescue
Service, evaluating safe staffing levels and consulting on national minimum standards. We will establish in law a standards body for fire prevention, protection and intervention, with trade union representation at all levels. We will reinstate separate governance arrangements for Fire and Rescue Service and police services. We will give fire services the duty to coordinate the emergency response to floods locally.
52IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEsalaati alll r.
- érc -_rs t ee. 7
_ MEDIAANDSPORT i “cs
Digitalbroadband infrastructure and.: retail broadband work.
Digital and technological advancements bring challenges, BDI will roll out the remaining 9O92% but also huge opportunities. In theof the full-fibre network, and acquire age of Al and automation, digitalnecessary access rights to existing connectivity will underpin our futureassets. BBS will coordinate the delivery economy. We will need world-classof free broadband in tranches as digital infrastructure in which everyonethe full-fibre network is rolled out, can share. beginning with the communities worst served by existing broadband networks.
Labour will deliver free full-fibrer; oa “e * ie tional 3, sing axation of multinationals, includin broadband to all by 2O3O.,9 tech giants, will pay for the operating
We will establish British Broadband, costs of the public full-fibre network.
with two arms: British DigitalThe plan will boost jobs, tackle regional
Infrastructure (BDI) and the Britishinequality and improve quality of
Broadband Service (BBS). We will bringlife as part of a mission to connect the broadband-relevant parts of BTthe country.
into public ownership, with a jobs.:. We will enforce a legal duty of care to guarantee for all workers in existing; oo.; protect our children online, impose fines
REBUILD OUR PUBLIC SERVICES53on companies that fail on online abuseWe will work with trade unions and and empower the public with a Charteremployers to make creative jobs of Digital Rights. accessible for all, ensuring diversity in these industries so that everyone sees themselves represented on
Culturescreen and on stage. We will review the copyright framework to ensure
Britain’s thriving arts, culture and: purig::
_._fair remuneration for artists and creative industries drive investments. content creators.
and encourage tourism.
A Labour government will open up career opportunities in these industriesMedia for everyone and consult on ways to... A Labour government will ensure a address the gender imbalance in the::._. healthy future for all our public service digital creative industries.::
broadcasters, including BBC Alba and
We will introduce an Arts Pupil PremiumS4C. We will protect free TV licences for to every primary school in England -over-75s.
a £l6O million annual boost for schools:.:.. A free and fair press is vital to protecting to ensure creative and arts education.;;. democracy and holding the powerful to is embedded in secondary education, i. account.
and providing a pathway to grow our thriving creative sector. We will address misconduct and ae; the unresolved failures of corporate
We will invest in the towns and:
_governance raised by the second stage communities neglected for too long,:. a. of the abandoned Leveson Inquiry. We with a £l billion Cultural Capital Fund:
a. will take steps to ensure that Ofcom to transform libraries, museums and.; is better able to safeguard a healthy galleries across the country.:::
plurality of media ownership and to
We will make the distribution ofput in place clearer rules on who is fit
National Lottery funding moreand proper to own or run TV and radio transparent to help communitiesstations. We will take action to address get their fair share of project funding. the monopolistic hold the tech giants. a. have on advertising revenues and will
We will maintain free entry to:
support vital local newspapers and museums, because everyone should;. media outlets.
have access to our shared heritage.
Building on the success of the UK CityWe will consult media-sector workers of Culture, we will launch a Town ofand trade unions to establish an inquiry
Culture competition. into the ‘fake news’ undermining trust in
54IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEmedia, democracy and public debate, We will add the ICC Cricket World and on a legal right of public interestCup to the list of crown jewel sporting defence for journalists. events that are broadcast freeto-air.
We will commission an independent review into discrimination in sport.
Sport
Sport enriches our lives, binds communities together and helpsGambling us all to stay healthy..
A Labour government will curb
Sport must be accessible and run in thegambling advertising in sports and interests of those who participate in itintroduce a new Gambling Act fit for and love it. the digital age, establishing gambling. limits, a levy for problem gambling
In football, the professional gamefunding and mechanisms for consumer has become divided between the:. compensations.
extremes of the very rich and the very poor with clubs in Bury and Bolton facing collapse. A Labour government..... Civic Society will examine the state of the game, its governance and regulation, itsIn the years of austerity it was ownership rules and the support andnon-government organisations that funding of the clubs that are vital tooften held the social fabric of our local communities. We will review thesociety together, protecting our
‘fit and proper person test’ for clubcommunities from even greater owners and directors and ensure thatharm and providing precisely targeted supporters’ trusts have a proper role sosupport. As we rebuild our public that the professional game is properlyservices, we will support and maintain run for all its fans and all its clubs. the social capital values of these.. organisations.
A Labour government will legislate for accredited football supporters’ trusts to be able to appoint and remove at least two club directors and purchase shares when clubs change hands. We will regulate safe standing in stadiums and ensure that a proportion of the Premier
League's television rights income is spent on grassroots football facilities.
REBUILD OUR PUBLIC SERVICES5556IT'S TIME FOR REAL CHANGETACKLE
POVERTY AND
INEQUALITY
59 WORK
65 WOMEN AND EQUALITIES
7OMIGRATION
72SOCIAL SECURITY
IHOUSING
8lCONSTITUTIONAL ISSUES
-Hl lr'I
> re'rs ie,4-'By ’G on(EXPE‘iYI sil
\an © / ie; rzaeS__-fe
‘CIyy
Work should provideUnder the Tories, pay has stagnated while insecurity a decent life for all, and inequality are rising.
guaranteeing not just.. Work no longer guarantees a way out of poverty.
dignity and respect in thea.. wes
Of l4.3 million people in poverty, nine million live in workplace, but also the... families where at least one adult works. Real wages income and leisure time;;;..
eoare still lower than before the financial crisis, while to allow for a fulfilling lifea:
ca. dividends paid to shareholders are up 85%.
outside it.
Labour will eradicate inwork poverty in our first term by tackling the structural causes of poverty and inequality, such as low pay and high living costs, while raising the floor provided by our social safety net.
Too many people have found themselves in a spiral of debt as wages fell and housing costs rose. Labour will cap the total amount that can be paid in overdraft fees or interest on a loan.
We will rapidly introduce a Real Living Wage of at least
£lO per hour for all workers aged l6 and over, and use
TACKLE POVERTY AND INEQUALITY59savings to public finances to help smallWe will tackle late payments that businesses manage the extra cost. leave small businesses and the self-employed waiting months to
We will give workers a stake in the: P J; g:: be paid, including banning late payers companies they work for - and a share;. from public procurement.
of the profits they help create - by requiring large companies to set up
Inclusive Ownership Funds (IOFs). Up... Ministry for Employment Rights to lO% of a company will be owned collectively by employees, withThroughout history, working people dividend payments distributed equallyin Britain have improved their lives by among all, capped at £5OO a year, coming together to demand rights and the rest being used to top up theand protections. Even after decades
Climate Apprenticeship Fund. The capin which workers’ rights have been will rise to ensure that no more thancut back and their unions’ capacity
25% of dividends raised by IOFs areto defend them have been slashed, redistributed in this way. the Tories believe that workers’ terms;.. and conditions should be dictated by
And we will explore other innovative;;,.. employers on a ‘take it or leave it’ basis.
ways of responding to low pay, including a pilot of UniversalWe are proud of the trade union
Basic Income. movement's historic achievements in iving people a voice at work through
Growing numbers of the workforce aregiving P P::: g.. collective action. It is not just part of our self-employed. While for some this;_... history; it is also part of our future. Only brings freedom and autonomy, it cana,. by shifting the balance of power back also bring insecurity. Self-employed.:
‘. towards workers will we achieve decent people will benefit from a broad range;,.. wages, security and dignity at work.
of our policies, from free childcare and full-fibre broadband to faceto-faceThe next Labour government will lending and business support throughtransform people’s lives for the better our Post Bank. through the biggest extension of workers’ rights in history.
We will also seek to develop tailoredg4 support and protections for the selfWe will give working people a voice employed, including: collective incomeat the Cabinet table by establishing protection insurance schemes, annuala Ministry for Employment Rights.
income assessments for those on... We will start to roll out sectoral
Universal Credit, and better access to;_.. collective bargaining across the mortgages and pension schemes. a economy, bringing workers and employers together to agree legal
6OIT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEminimum standards on a wide range of+ Increasing wages through sectoral issues, such as pay and working hours, collective bargaining.
that every employer in the sector must
J emplog;.;+ Requiring breaks during shifts to follow. Sectoral collective bargaining willbd e paid.
increase wages and reduce inequality. P
This will also stop good employers+ Requiring cancelled shifts to be paid being undercut by bad employers. and proper notice for changes... in hours.
We will tackle insecurity by:
a;* Giving all workers the right to flexible
* Giving everyone full rights from day,: working.
one on the job.
- Extending statutory maternity pa
* Strengthening protections for. g44 Pag... from nine to l2 months.
whistleblowers and rights against unfair dismissal for all workers, with+ Doubling paternity leave from two extra protections for pregnant women, weeks to four and increasing statutory those going through the menopausepaternity pay.
and terminally ill workers..
+ Introducing statutory bereavement
- Ending bogus self-employmentleave, guaranteeing workers time and creating a single status ofoff to grieve the loss of close family
‘worker’ for everyone apart frommembers or following miscarriage.
those genuinely self-employed in..;.+ Introducing four new bank holidays business on their own account, so that.5, celebrating our four patron saints employers can not evade workers.. days.
rights; and banning overseas-only recruitment practices.+ Reviewing family-friendly employment rights, including rights to respond to
+ Introducing a legal right to collectiveg. g "9P... family emergencies.
consultation on the implementation of new technology in workplaces. We will make sure people are treated equally at work by:
* Banning zero-hour contracts andawe4 strengthening the law so that those+ Requiring employers to devise and who work regular hours for more thanimplement plans to eradicate the l2 weeks will have a right to a regulargender pay gap - and pay inequalities contract, reflecting those hours. underpinned by race and/or disability
- or face fines.
We will help people balance work and family life by:+ Requiring employers to maintain workplaces free of harassment, including harassment by third parties.
TACKLE POVERTY AND INEQUALITY6l- Increasing protection againstfor trade unions to help them win a redundancy for people whereverbetter deal for working people.
they work. oo..
* Simplify the law around union
* Giving statutory rights to equalitiesrecognition.
representatives
* Give union reps adequate time off
* Setting up a Royal Commission tofor union duties.
bring health (including mental health): a oo. We will develop collective incomeand safety legislation up to date. oo, protection insurance schemes for the
* Ensuring that public-facing workersself-employed. We will introduce a are protected by toughening the lawmaximum workplace temperature to against abuse and violence. protect workers and require employers. oe. to take counteracting measures.
+ Banning unpaid internships..; For years, the UK has been in breach
We will remove unfair and unnecessary;:.
i.;; of our international obligations. We restrictions on trade unions, allowinga::.
will bring UK law into line with the people to come together and speak up---. International Labour Organisation on issues that affect them at work.. ve: a standards it has ratified, so Britain leads
We will: the world, instead of engaging in a race. to the bottom.
- Allow trade unions to use secure electronic and workplace ballots.
» Remove unnecessary restrictions onWorking Time industrial action
Time off to rest, relax and be with family
* Strengthen and enforce trade unions’is essential to a happy and fulfilling life, right of entry to workplaces tobut workers in the UK put in some of the organise, meet and represent theirlongest hours in Europe.
members and to recruit.:..
Labour will tackle excessive working
- Ban union-busting, strengthenhours. Within a decade we will reduce protection of trade unionaverage full-time weekly working hours representatives against unfairto 32 across the economy, with no dismissal and union members fromloss of pay, funded by productivity intimidation, harassment, threats andincreases.
blacklisting.:.
We will meet this target by:
* Repeal anti-trade union legislation..;;;+ Ending the opt-out provision for including the Trade Union Act 2Ol6;::.. the EU Working Time Directive and and create new rights and freedoms.°::
enforcing working-time regulations.
62IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGE* Setting up an independent WorkingRewriting the Rules
Time Commission to advise onoo,.
a.;; Social justice also means levelling the raising minimum holiday entitlements::.;. playing field between small and big and reducing maximum weekly°; o, business, and ensuring that democracy working time.
and accountability are valued across
* Mandating bargaining councils tosociety, including in the private sector.
negotiate reductions in working time..
Businesses are the heartbeat of our
- Investing to increase productivityeconomy, creating jobs, wealth and and making sure workers share theinnovations.
benefits.
But the upper echelons of corporate
We will keep restrictions on SundayBritain have been corrupted by a trading in place and review unpaidculture in which the long-term health overtime. of acompany is sacrificed for a quick buck for a few: a short-term culture
Enforcementhas seen some treasured companies asset-strioped, leaving workers, small
Rights don’t mean anything unlessJPP: g::,; business suppliers and pensioners in they’re enforced, but that is not:;. the lurch. Too often, the link between happening under the Tories.; reward and long-term performance is
That doesn’t just hurt workers who losebroken for short-term greed.
out, it is also bad for employers who..
Labour will take on short-termism and follow the law and are undercut by:. corporate greed, making sure good unscrupulous competitors prepared.; businesses are rewarded, not undercut.
to break it.::
We will rewrite the rules of the economy
Strong trade unions are the best andand ensure everyone plays by them.
most effective way to enforce rights at..;; We will amend the Companies Act, work. Labour will also introduce a new,.: oo.
wes,; requiring companies to prioritise unified Workers’ Protection Agency::;.; long-term growth while strengthening to enforce workplace rights, including:::
_;; protections for stakeholders, including the Real Living Wage. It will be given.... smaller suppliers and pension funds.
extensive powers to inspect workplaces.;;_We will tackle late payments that leave and bring prosecutions and civil:;, small businesses waiting months to be proceedings on workers’ behalf..:; paid, including banning late payers from
We will keep employment tribunalspublic procurement.
free, extend their powers, and...; For small businesses, we will ensure no introducenew Labour Courts with a;:
aa.. quarterly reporting for businesses below stronger role for people with industrial; the VAT threshold.
experience on panels.
TACKLE POVERTY AND INEQUALITY63We will require one-third of boards toof what class or postcode they are born be reserved for elected worker-directorsinto, or the colour of their skin.
and give them more control over_.; But that’s impossible when you cannot executive pay - because when those:
meet your most basic needs and have who depend on a company have a say.:., to choose between eating and heating in running it, that company generally..
your home. Britain is one of the richest does better and lasts longer.-- countries in the world, but under the,
We will introduce a broader ‘publicTories millions of people can’t makeI interest test’ to prevent hostileends meet.
takeovers and asset-strippin.;. ppingThey tell us we shouldn't care about weakening our industrial base and.::.; inequality, because social mobility destroying treasured home-grown. a. allows those who work hard to get companies. And we will give workers.:.;. on. But nobody becomes a billionaire a voice on public bodies such as the a. through hard work alone, and as
Competition and Markets Authority.;..
inequality has grown, it has become
We will let struggling companies go intomore entrenched.) protective administration, so they can. I. For Labour, the true measure of fairness be sold as a going concern rather than:;_oo, oe, is not social mobility but social justice.
collapsing into insolvency... Implicit in the notion of social mobility
Audits are vital to corporate¢ the idea that' diIt is the idea that poverty and inequali accountability, but the auditing industryP; 444;;; are acceptable provided some people is dominated by a few players riddled;; can climb the social ladder.
with conflicts of interest. Labour will separate audit and accounting activitiesSocial justice, on the other hand, in major firms and impose more robustdemands that we end poverty, reduce rules on auditors. inequality and create a society in which. the conditions for a fulfilling life are
We will tackle regulatory capture and..;. available to everyone.
streamline regulation by creating a new
Business Commission, responsive toLabour will replace the Social Mobility parliamentary select committees. Commission with a Social Justice
Commission, based in the Treasury, with wide-ranging powers to hold us,
Social Justice Commissionand future governments, to account.
Labour will usher in a new era of social justice in Britain. Everyone in our society should be allowed to flourish regardless
64IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGE‘- fa. a
*£ 'ad -ea a"B
4.,7--
(~Ar}
-’id allll aeaa+. d
*\7»
J>,
Labour is the party ofThe Conservatives have failed to tackle society's equality, committed toburning injustices. Instead, they have inflicted injustice achieving a world freeafter injustice on women, Black, Asian and Minority from all forms of bigotryEthnic (BAME) and LGBT+ communities and disabled and discrimination. people. Over 85% of the burden of Tory/Lib Dem cuts
Whether campaigninghas fallen on the shoulders of women.
on the streets or;. tesLabour will create a new Department for Women passing legislation in_, J:
and Equalities, with a full-time Secretary of State, government, Labour.._.: responsible for ensuring all our policies and laws are is the only party to_-::;.. equality-impact assessed in order to deliver a fairer consistently stand with.. society for women and all under-represented groups.
women, disabled people,.;;:;. We will establish a modernised National Women’s people from ethnici.; J. Commission as an independent advisory body to minority backgrounds.. contribute to a Labour government.
and LGBT+ communities.
We are guided by our firm commitment to the Human
Rights Act and Convention on Human Rights that have been consistently attacked by the Conservatives. We will ratify both the Istanbul Convention on preventing domestic abuse and the ILO Convention on Violence and Harassment at work.
TACKLE POVERTY AND INEQUALITY65We will put class at the heart of Britain’sdismissal of pregnant women without equality agenda and create a newprior approval of the inspectorate.
ground for discrimination on the basis:. oo.* Transform the workplace and require of socio-economic disadvantage.; all large employers to have flexible working, including a menopause policy, and consider changes to
Women..
sickness and absence practices.
Labour will put women at the heart of.::
+ Enable positive action for recruitment our government and programme. Next,; to roles where employers can justify year marks the 5Oth anniversary of the; J. the need for more diversity and
Equal Pay Act, yet women still earn l3%.... introduce a right for all workers to less than men. Labour will take action toa:
request flexibility over their hours from close the gender pay gap by 2O3O.; the first day of employment.
We will also::
- Ensure that the single-sex-based
* Deliver gender pay equality by makingexemptions contained in the Equality the state responsible for enforcingAct 2OlO are understood and fully equal pay legislation for the first time. enforced in service provision.
The new Workers’ Protection Agency;...* Create a safer society for women working with HMRC will ensure thatoo.:. and prioritise domestic abuse as a employers take equal pay seriously...
i. health issue, introduce lO days of paid and take positive action to close the;". leave for survivors of domestic abuse, gender pay gap. Women will no longer;.. and ensure women’s refuges receive be left to take enforcement action by;:
the long-term sustainable funding themselves through the courts.;:
they need. Misogyny and violence
* Require all employers with over 25Oagainst women and girls will become employees to obtain governmenthate crimes.
certification on gender equality or face,;
_..+ Increase women’s representation further auditing and fines. By the end:. across parliament by building on of 2O2O, we will lower the threshold to.;. the Equality Act, passed by the workplaces with 5O employees, whilst
__. last Labour government, and enact providing the necessary additional:.:. Section lO6 so that all political parties support for small businesses.:::
publish diversity data about electoral
- Revolutionise parents’ rights bycandidates.
increasing paid maternity leave from nine to l2 months, doubling paternity leave to four weeks and extending pregnancy protection. We will ban the
66IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGERace Equalityaccess to finance, which many BAME,. a: business owners face; and take action
Achieving racial equality is a bedrock to ensure that BAME and women
Labour value. It has never been more:... business owners have access to important than in the current climate..
government contracts and spending.
We are proud of the way our country has been shaped by the contributions,+ Implement recommendations of cultures and values of people fromthe Lammy Review to address the around the world. disparity of treatment and outcomes for BAME people within the criminal
The Conservatives have fanned the-peop... justice system.
flames of racism, using difference to divide. They have made BAME* Create an Emancipation Educational people pay the price for their austerityTrust to educate around migration and project and scapegoated refugees andcolonialism, and to address the legacy migrants. Never was this starker thanof slavery and teach how it interrupted with their ‘hostile environment’, leadinga rich and powerful black history which to the scandalous treatment of theis also British history.
Windrush generation. Hate crime has. oo,:.. On religious discrimination, we will:
more than doubled in the last five years.
This is a wakeup call for all of us.+ Strengthen protection for religious. communities and amend the law
Labour will ensure a pathway to.... to include attacks on places of economic inclusion for all, putting--J; worship (including synagogues, an end to all forms of racism and netemples, mosques and churches) discrimination in our economy andae;;; as a specific aggravated offence.
society. Inclusion will be at the heart of its programme for government.+ Review current levels of funding for. and access to the Places of Worship
We will:...
Protective Security Funding Scheme,
* Seek to end the politics of hate andmaintain funding in real terms for the commission an independent reviewCommunity Security Trust, and consult into the threat of far-right extremismon giving it statutory protection to and how to tackle it. ensure that religious communities have the support they need.
» Put wealth and power in the hands ofPP9 the many, extend pay-gap reporting to BAME groups and tackle payae.. o.
oe,. Disability with Dignity discrimination on the basis of race... Over the last lO years, through
* Commit our National Investment.. oe, a catalogue of punitive welfare
Bank to addressing discrimination in. on:
policies, the dignity of people with
TACKLE POVERTY AND INEQUALITY67disabilities has been degraded by theleave, paid and recorded separately
Conservatives. Not one, but two UNfrom sick leave.
reports describe the government having..; eg+ Recommend that the Equality committed ‘systematic violations’ of the:..;.; and Human Rights Commission rights of disabled people - while theira:.. o... prepare a specific code of practice families have been ‘driven to breakingJ oo; on reasonable adjustments to point’ by cuts to social care. I:
supplement existing codes. This
More disabled people are now living inwill provide an appropriate balance poverty, and people have died becausebetween flexibility and clarity on of this government’s choice to makehow ‘reasonable’ cost is determined.
the most vulnerable pay for tax cutsThe code will also set timescales for the few. Labour will end this cruelty, for implementation of reasonable restoring the protections that disabledadjustments to end the long and people and their families - many ofdistressing delays experienced by whom shoulder the cost of their caredisabled workers.
- should expect in one of the richest.:
_,- Reinstate the Access to Elected Office countries in the world.:
Fund to enable disabled people to run
Labour supports the principle offor elected office.
‘nothing about us without us’..:
+ Adopt a British Sign Language Act,
We will: giving BSL full legal recognition in law.
* Champion the social model ofWe will work with employers, trade disability throughout government. unions and public services to improve
Through our new Department forawareness of neurodiversity in the
Women and Equalities, we willworkplace and in society.
ensure that disabled people can be independent and equal in society, with choice and control over their own lives. LGBT+ Equality
- Transform the workplace for disabledLabour has a proud history of standing people by requiring that all employersshoulder to shoulder with LGBT+ be trained to better support them, people. We abolished Section 28, while introducing mandatory disabilityequalised the age of consent, created pay-gap reporting for companies withcivil partnerships, and only with over 25O employees. Labour votes could equal marriage become law. Labour is committed to
- End disability discrimination and: i”.. reforming the Gender Recognition Act update the Equality Act to introduce::
i__,. oan2OO4 to introduce self-declaration for new specific duties including disability transgender people, but we are not
68IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEcomplacent about the culture shift+ Respond fast and firmly wherever required to make LGBT+ inclusivity aLGBT+ people face violence reality. The Conservatives have beenor persecution internationally slow to understand the scale of abuseand appoint a dedicated global and discrimination LGBT+ peopleambassador to the Foreign Office on continue to face in our society. LGBT+ issues.
Labour will eliminate remaining areasLabour will work with organisations and of discrimination in law, ensuringcharities already making the UK a more that LGBT+ people can live in safetyequal and fairer society and together and dignity. we will build a country for the many,
We will: not the few.
+ Put LGBT+ equality at the heart of government, ensuring our public services are LGBT+ inclusive and delivering on the national LGBT
Action Plan.
- Take steps to safeguard LGBT+ rights inside or outside the EU, such as retaining and promoting the Human
Rights Act.
- Tackle the homelessness and rough sleeping crisis in the UK, ensuring that all strategies and services are tailored to understand needs unique to LGBT+ homeless people, particularly young people who make up a disproportionate number of our currently homeless people.
- Provide sufficient funding for schools to deliver mandatory LGBT+ inclusive relationships and sex education.
- Fully fund sexual health services and roll out PrEP medication.
TACKLE POVERTY AND INEQUALITY69f: a:
ssaI
<d as Og I a
MIGRATION «st4 ]
A Labour governmentOur immigration system must allow us to recruit the will establish a humanepeople we need, and to welcome them and their immigration systemfamilies. Our work visa system must fill any skills or and end the ‘hostilelabour shortages that arise. The movement of people environment’ that caused around the world has enriched our society, the Windrush scandalour economy and our culture.
of British citizens being. a.
We will take decisive action to regulate the labour deported. Instead, our;.. market to stop the undercutting of wages and system will be built onwsgs.... conditions, and the exploitation of all workers including human rights and aimed;;;.. migrant workers. It is the actions of bad bosses and at meeting the skills and.::
successive Conservative governments that have driven labour shortages that; i
La. down wages and working terms and conditions. Labour exist in our economy and;... will ensure all workers have full and equal rights from public services.;.
day one, with a Real Living Wage for all.
The Conservative policy of pursuing net migration targets has undermined our economy and our public services, refusing entry to essential key workers including nurses. It has created a hostile environment
7OIT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEwithin our communities, encouragedbenefits that free movement has the demonisation of migrants andbrought both in terms of EU citizens enabled the callous use of three millionhere and UK citizens abroad - and we residents as bargaining chips in ourwill seek to protect those rights.
negotiations over EU withdrawal..
In accordance with our values and
Moreover, the Tories have not oncedomestic laws, we will uphold the met their own targets. Their migrationright to a family life for British, EU and policies are a complete and damagingnonEU residents alike. We will end failure, whichever way they arethe deportation of family members of looked at. people entitled to be here and end the.;; minimum income requirements which
We will scrap the 2Ol4 Immigrationseparate families.
Act introduced by the Tories with their
Liberal Democrat coalition partners.
We are for a levelling up of rights, not a. Refugees race to the bottom. We will not tolerate a two-tier system for those entitled toRefugees are victims of wars, be here. environmental catastrophes,
The Windrush scandal continuesfamine or persecution.
to create new victims. We willThis government has failed its end its injustices and provide fairinternational legal obligations to compensation to those who haverefugees and to allow people to unfairly suffered. exercise their rights to seek asylum.
We will end indefinite detention, reviewA Labour government will uphold those the alternatives to the inhumanerights and meet those obligations.
conditions of detention centres, andWe will work with others to resume close Yarl’s Wood and Brook House, rescue missions in the Mediterranean, from which immediate savings wouldco-operate with the French authorities contribute towards a fund of £2O millionto put an end to the horrific camps, to support the survivors of modernand establish safe and legal routes for slavery, people trafficking and domesticasylum seekers.
violence. We will ensure justice for..
migrant domestic workers and restoreOnce here, refugees will have the right the overseas domestic workers’ visa. to work, access to public services and will be treated humanely by
If we remain in the EU, freedom ofgovernment at all levels.
movement would continue. If we leave, it will be subject to negotiations, but we recognise the social and economic
TACKLE POVERTY AND INEQUALITY7l. -, I wr i a5 rn Mh f77lIif\ a. q ' \ is I yy
J.. tat r¥‘S
Labour holds socialWhile Labour wants a society in which people care for security in the sameone another, the Tories are trying to pitch us against esteem as our health andeach other.
education systems..;.. Under the Tories, the social security system has lost
It is there to help each;.; oo. sight of its purpose. Poverty has become endemic, of us in times of need.::
the glue that binds our society together has come
If someone falls on hard.;;. unstuck and, in the words of the United Nations, the times - because they;;:;
_.. Uk’s social safety net ‘has been deliberately removed lose their job, get sick or.;, and replaced with a harsh and uncaring ethos’.
lose a loved one - Labour will help them live withThe cruelty and heartlessness of the Tories has made dignity and providethe Department for Work and Pensions (DWP) a support to get themsymbol of fear. When people feel the DWP is more back on their feet. about harassment than a helping hand, something has gone seriously wrong. Labour will completely change this culture, replacing the DWP on day one with a
Department for Social Security, which will be there to help and support people, not punish and police them.
72IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEWe will put children at the heart ofWe will end the five-week wait by everything we do, developing a cross-introducing an interim payment governmental National Strategy forbased on half an estimated monthly
Childhood focusing on health, security, entitlement. We will immediately well-being and poverty. We will givesuspend the Tories’ vicious sanction effect to the UN Convention on theregime and ensure that employment
Rights of the Child. support is positive not punitive.
We will stop 3OO, OOO children from being i ty by scrapping the
Universal Crediteing l) powers 9ppl 9.
benefit cap and the two child limit, so
The Tories’ flagship social securityending the immoral and outrageous programme, Universal Credit (UC),‘rape clause’. We will pay childcare costs has been a catastrophe. It has pushedup front so that parents aren't forced to thousands of people into poverty, turn down work or get into debt to pay caused families to lose their homes andfor childcare.
forced parents to visit food banks in.::
oo, Labour will protect women in abusive order to feed their children.;. a.
relationships by splitting payments
Labour will scrap UC. We willand paying the child element to the immediately stop moving people ontoprimary carer. We will make it easier for it and design an alternative system thatpeople to manage their living costs by treats people with dignity and respect. introducing fortnightly payments and
Our ambition in designing this systempaying the housing element directly to will be to end poverty by guaranteeinglandlords.
a minimum standard of living. oy eee;
The Conservative’s ‘digital only
We will start developing this systemapproach is excluding vulnerable immediately. But we have learned thepeople. Labour will end the digital lessons from Tory failure: major policybarrier and offer telephone, face-tochange can't be delivered overnight, face and outreach support. We will especially when people's lives dependrecruit 5, OOO additional advisors to on it. So we will also implement andeliver this.
emergency package of reforms to;.
_. Tory cuts are pushing people into rent mitigate some of the worst features.:; arrears and leaving them at risk of of UC while we develop our..
homelessness. We will stop housing replacement system...
costs running away from benefits by scrapping the bedroom tax and increasing the Local Housing Allowance.
TACKLE POVERTY AND INEQUALITY73Disabled PeopleWe will stop the dehumanising Work
Capability and PIPAts,
Labour stands with and for disabledape ung 2)ssessmen.;.; which repeatedly and falsely find ill or people. We will always challenge stigma..
oo,_. disabled people fit to work, and make and discrimination wherever it is found:.. sure all assessments are done inhouse.
and support the right of disabled people to live independently and beSocial security is meant to help treated with respect. disabled people cope with the i,.,, additional costs and disadvantages
The Tories’ rhetoric of ‘scroungers:
co.,; they face. But the Tories have cut back and ‘skivers’ has whipped up hatred of./; easthat support to inadequate levels. Time disabled people, with disability hateon;.; and again disabled people have had to crime skyrocketing, up 37% in the last.:;. fight through the courts to receive the year alone. Labour will never demonise:; support they are entitled to.
disabled people or the unemployed.
Labill makle whill
Labour follows the social model of° our we mae eure peopie we are arLe, a: and disabled receive the support they disability - it is not people’s condition;.... need to lead full, independent lives.
or impairment that disables them, but society's failure to adapt to thoseWe will:
conditions and impairments. We are;;;+ Increase Employment and Support committed to removing the barriers.. Allowance by £3O per week for those constructed by society and ensuring:... in the work-related activity group.
that disabled people can participate fully and equally in our society.+ Raise the basic rate of support for. children with disabilities to the level of
The Conservatives have created a.;... Child Tax Credits.
hostile environment for disabled people, who have borne the brunt of Tory cuts.+ Ensure that severely disabled people
The United Nations has said that thewithout a formal carer receive extra
Tories have systematically and gravelysupport to enable them to meet the violated disabled people’s rights byextra costs they inevitably face.
denying them the support they are;. We will support those who look after entitled to.::, others, increasing the Carer’s Allowance
Labour will end this hostile environment. to the level of the Jobseeker’s aysAllowance.
We will give effect to the UN
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and amend the
Equality Act to reflect the social model of disability.
74IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEWe will help disabled people who wantto raise the State Pension Age, leaving to work by bringing back specialistit at 66. We will review retirement ages employment advisors, introducingfor physically arduous and stressful a government-backed Reasonableoccupations, including shift workers,
Adjustments Passport scheme to helpin the public and private sectors.
people move between jobs more easily,; oo, a.;,; We will maintain the ‘triple lock’ and and reviewing support for disabled;.; guarantee the Winter Fuel Payment, people at work, including the Access to; free TV licences and free bus passes
Work scheme.:.
as universal benefits.
Thanks to automatic enrolment,
Pensionswhich was introduced by the last
_Labour government, record numbers
People work hard for most of their lives:; of employees are now in workplace and deserve a decent retirement free of:
pension schemes. But too many financial stress and insecurity.:.
people are still not saving enough
Under the Tories, 4OO, OOO pensionersfor a comfortable retirement.
have been pushed into poverty and. PP. 4We will stop people being auto-enrolled a generation of women born in the;:;. into rip-off schemes and seek to l95Os have had their pension age.;; aewiden and expand access for more changed without fair notification.:. a. low-income and self-employed workers.
This betrayal left millions of women::.... We will establish an independent with no time to make alternative plansi, a;.: Pensions’ Commission, modelled on the
- with sometimes devastating personal.
Low Pay Commission, to recommend consequences..
target levels for workplace pensions.
Labour recognises this injustice, and:::.;. We will create a single, comprehensive will work with these women to design::
and publicly run pensions dashboard a system of recompense for the losses::;.. that is fully transparent, including and insecurity they have suffered.;; information about costs and charges.
We will ensure that such an injustice::. oo, We will legislate to allow the CWUcan never happen again by legislating:.: Royal Mail agreement for a collective to prevent accrued rights to the state;;. pension scheme to proceed and allow pension from being changed.-_ similar schemes.
The Conservatives have repeatedly...: Labour has listened to the NUM and raised the state pension age despite:; oo,; oo. in government will end the injustice of overseeing a decline in life expectancy.... iythe state taking 5O% of the surplus in
Labour will abandon the Tories’ plans:,:
the Mineworkers’ Pension Scheme and
TACKLE POVERTY AND INEQUALITY75introduce new sharing arrangements so that lO% goes to government and
9O% stays with scheme members.
This new sharing arrangement will also apply to the British Coal Staff
Superannuation Scheme.
We will ensure that the pensions of UK citizens living overseas rise in line with pensions in Britain.
76IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEye*J
TARY tai, de I ANNAN
Everyone has the right toThere is no starker symbol of the failing housing a decent, secure home. system than the horror of the Grenfell Tower fire.
In l945, Labour promisedA Labour government will bring system-wide change, to ‘proceed withaso that a tragedy like Grenfell never happens again.
housing programmeWe will introduce a £l billion Fire Safety Fund to fit with the maximumsprinklers and other fire safety measures in all highpractical speed untilrise council and housing association tower blocks, every family in this island enforce the replacement of dangerous Grenfellhas a good standard ofstyle cladding on all high-rise homes and buildings, accommodation’. In 2Ol9, - while introducing mandatory building standards and we renew that pledge. guidance, inspected and enforced by fully trained
But too many peopleFire and Rescue Service fire safety officers.
are being denied their... Grenfell Tower was the confirmation of a more farright to a good home by: a. reaching crisis. Everyone knows of someone affected our housing system thatby the housiable to b treats homes as financialy e housing crisis: younger people unable ° uy a first home, renters trapped in damp flats, families assets rather than places;.:
to livestuck on council waiting lists, leasehold home-owners ive.
hit by unfair fees, people who are homeless living and dying on our streets. The gap between the housing
TACKLE POVERTY AND INEQUALITY7haves and have-nots is at the heartLabour will tackle the climate crisis and of the injustice in our country today. cut energy bills by introducing a tough,.. new zero-carbon homes standard for
Since 2OlO, the Conservatives have: i. all new homes, and upgrading millions slashed funding for new homes,; of existing homes to make them more refused to regulate for higher standards..:;; energy efficient. We will review the and given a free hand to commercial,:
planning guidance for developments property developers. There are fewer..; ain flood risk areas.
new homes for social rent, a million more households stuck renting from a private landlord, 9OO, OOO fewer..; Council and Social Homes young people owning a home and more than twice as many peopleThe only way to deliver on everyone’s sleeping on our streets. right to a good home is to build publicly funded social housing.
Only Labour has a plan to fix theg housing crisis. We will act on every frontLabour will deliver a new social to bring the cost of housing down andhousebuilding programme of more than standards up, so that everyone has aa million homes over a decade, with decent, affordable place to call home. council housing at its heart. By the end. of the Parliament we will be building
Labour will create a new Department. at an annual rate of at least l5O, OOO for Housing, make Homes England a:: J.; council and social homes, with lOO, OOO more accountable national housing:: J
-_of these built by councils for social rent agency and put councils in the driving; J... in the biggest council housebuilding seat. We will set out a strategy fora::
oa:.. programme in more than a generation.
flourishing construction sector with a::..; We will establish a new duty on councils skilled workforce and full rights at work.:;; to plan and build these homes in their
Labour will set up a new Englisharea, and fund them to do so, with
Sovereign Land Trust, with powers tobacking from national government.
buy land more cheaply for low-cost; oy.;;; We will scrap the Conservatives’ bogus housing. We will use public land to build..;;:..;. definition of ‘affordable’, set as high this housing, not sell it off to the highest.... as 8O% of market rents, and replace it bidder. Developers will face new ‘use: oo:;.,; with a definition linked to local incomes.
it or lose it’ taxes on stalled housing::.; These council and housing association developments. We will keep the Land.... homes will be more affordable than
Registry in public hands, and make.::; market housing and built to higher ownership of land more transparent. J:..; standards. We will end the conversion
We will make brownfield sites the:. of office blocks to homes that priority for development and protect: J.
sidestep planning permission the green belt.:;; through ‘permitted development’.
78IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEWe will stop the haemorrhage of low-will bring empty homes back into use cost homes by ending the right toby giving councils new powers to tax buy, along with the forced conversionproperties empty for over a year.
of social rented homes to socalled.;;.. Labour will end the scandal of leasehold affordable rent’. We will review the casei:.. for the millions who have bought their for reducing the amount of housing,.;;; home but don't feel like they own it.
debt councils currently hold. And we will:.;. We will end the sale of new leasehold give councils the powers and funding to;;:. properties, abolish unfair fees and buy back homes from private landlords..:
conditions, and give leaseholders the
We will give tenants a stronger say inright to buy their freehold at a price the management of their homes andthey can afford. We will introduce stop social cleansing by making sureequivalent rights for freeholders on regeneration only goes ahead whenprivately owned estates.
it has the consent of residents, and that all residents are offered a new property on the same site and terms. Private Renters
We will fund a new Decent Homes.. More than ll million people rent from a programme to bring all council and.;. private landlord and many of them are housing association homes up to a;.
at the sharp end of the housing crisis.
good standard.::
We will take urgent action to protect private renters through rent controls,. open-ended tenancies, and new,
Home Ownership.
binding minimum standards.
Under the Tories, home ownership is.. Labour will stop runaway rents by getting further out of reach for more: a:.
capping them with inflation, and give and more people. Numbers of new.
cities powers to cap rents further.
affordable homes to buy have fallen, and fewer younger people can affordWe will give renters the security they their own home. We will build moreneed to make their rented housing a low-cost homes reserved for first-timehome, with new open-ended tenancies buyers in every area, including Labour'sto stop unfair, ‘no fault’ evictions. We new discount homes with prices linkedwill make sure every property is up to to local incomes. scratch with new minimum standards,. enforced through nationwide licensing
We will reform Help to Buy to focus.;;;. and tougher sanctions for landlords who it on first-time buyers on ordinary:;;_flout the rules. We will fund new renters incomes. We will introduce a levy on::... unions in every part of the country - to overseas companies buying housing,.
oo. ioyallow renters to organise and defend while giving local people ‘first dibs.
ar. their rights.
on new homes built in their area. We
TACKLE POVERTY AND INEQUALITY79We will get rid of the discriminatoryWe will bring in a new national levy on rules that require landlords to checksecond homes used as holiday homes people’s immigration status or thatto help deal with the homelessness allow them to exclude people oncrisis, so that those who have done well housing benefit. We will give councilsfrom the housing market pay a bit more new powers to regulate short-term letsto help those with no home.
through companies such as Airbnb.:: oo.
We will save lives this winter by ensuring extra shelters and support are in place in all areas. And we'll repeal the
HomelessnessVagrancy Act and amend antisocial
No one should sleep without a roofbehaviour legislation to stop the law over their head in one of the richestbeing used against people because countries in the world. But under thethey are homeless.
Tories, the number of people sleeping rough has more than doubled.
Over l25, OOO children are now living in temporary accommodation, without a home to call their own - or the space they need to thrive. Labour will tackle the root causes of rising homelessness with more affordable homes and stronger rights for renters.
Labour will end rough sleeping within five years, with a national plan driven by a prime minister-led taskforce. We will expand and upgrade hostels, turning them into places where people can turn their lives around. We will make available 8, OOO additional homes for people with a history of rough sleeping.
We will tackle the wider causes of homelessness, raising the Local
Housing Allowance in line with the 3Oth percentile of local rents, and earmarking an additional £l billion a year for councils’ homelessness services.
8OIT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEi -?_a:) bo'4 sonms l i2ME a I"QS, (i eerere: Gia oe a, pf, Se i ee go CONSTITUTIONALISSUES Ss,”
For many people, politicsWe want our political institutions to be connected fully doesn’t work. Theto the wider electorate, and will take urgent steps to
Westminster bubble isrefresh our democracy.
a world away from theirThe time has come for the real changes that a Labour daily lives. The Labouroo government will bring.
Party was founded to give working-classWe will act immediately to end the hereditary people a voice in politics. principle in the House of Lords, and work to abolish the House of Lords in favour of Labour’s preferred option of an elected Senate of the Nations and
Regions, but we also believe that the people must be central to historic political changes.
The renewal of our Parliament will be subject to recommendations made by a UKwide Constitutional
Convention, led by a citizens’ assembly. This
Convention will answer crucial questions on how power is distributed in the UK today, how nations and regions can best relate to each other and how a
Labour government can best put power in the hands of the people.
TACKLE POVERTY AND INEQUALITY8lOnly a Labour government willTackling Vested Interests safeguard the future of a devolved UK,: oo,.. a. Labour will change how politics is reforming the way in which it works to::
Ofunded, banning donations from tax make it fit for the future.::
avoiders and tax evaders, and closing
Britain is one of the most centralisedloopholes that allow the use of shell countries in Europe. Labour willcompanies to funnel dark money decentralise decision-making andinto politics.
strengthen local democracy. We::.:;; We will free the voices of civil society reiterate our commitment to Onebling the Lobbuina Act 2Ol4 repealing the Lobbying Ac
Yorkshire, and will make directly elected¥Fepg; ying and overhauling the rules that govern mayors more accountable to local._.. corporate lobbying. We will introduce councillors and elected representatives.::.
a lobbying register covering both
We will reestablish regionalin-house lobbyists and think tanks and
Government Offices to make centralextending to contacts made with all government more attuned to oursenior government employees, not
English regions, to support our regionaljust ministers.
investments, and to enable the shift of::.:
us. We will also increase the financial political power away from Westminster...
penalties available to the Electoral
Our democratic revolution will alsoCommission and require imprints for extend to elections. digital political adverts.
A Labour government will repeal theWe will stop MPs from taking paid
Fixed-term Parliaments Act 2Oll, whichsecond jobs, with limited exemptions has stifled democracy and propped upto maintain professional registrations weak governments. We will maintainlike nursing. We will replace ACOBA,
65O constituencies and respondthe business appointments committee, objectively to future, independentwith a sufficiently resourced and boundary reviews. We will oversee theempowered new body, governed by a largest extension of the franchise indiverse and representative board and generations, reducing the voting ageestablished in law. We will also overhaul to l6, giving full voting rights to allthe system of ministerial appointments
UK residents, making sure everyoneto public office.
who is entitled to vote can do so by introducing a system of automatic voter registration, and abandoning plans to introduce voter ID which has been shown to harm democratic rights.
82IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEWe will bring greater transparency byWomen in Northern Ireland should extending Freedom of Informationhave access to abortions in Northern rules to cover private providers oflreland. A Labour government will fully public services, setting new standardsimplement new laws on equal marriage of consistent disclosure practice andin Northern Ireland so that sameending the six-month time limit in whichsex couples are no longer treated as the Information Commissioner cansecond-class citizens. We will work prosecute the deliberate destructionwith all major parties in Northern Ireland of public records. to provide a good platform for the restoration of devolution alongside bringing forward and implementing
Northern Irelanda Bill of Rights for Northern Ireland as
The Good Friday Agreement and long-outlined in the Good Friday Agreement.
term peace in Northern Ireland is oneA Labour government will also protect of the great achievements of LabourNorthern Ireland and its people in any in government. Therefore, as a priority, future Brexit outcome by ensuring
Labour will work quickly and tirelessly tothat there is no return to a hard border secure the return of a genuine power-between Northern Ireland and the sharing government in Northern Ireland. Republic of Ireland or the creation of a
The devolved power-sharing institutionsregulatory border down the Irish Sea.
have not been running in Stormont for over l, OOO days. During this period. Wales people have suffered in the face of a funding crisis as austerity continues toLabour’s constitutional convention damage public services, which Labourwill include the Welsh Government's will resolve.2Opoint plan for the future of the UK;. to better recognise the realities of a
Working with a new assembly and. devolved UK.
power-sharing government, Labour will invest an extra £l9 billion to endAlongside this work, we need long-term austerity and rebuild public services inreform of how the UK allocates public
Northern Ireland. expenditure to ensure that it reflects the needs of different parts of our country and that no nation or region of the UKis unfairly disadvantaged.
Labour in Wales has pioneered the social partnership approach. With a UK
Labour government investing an extra
TACKLE POVERTY AND INEQUALITY83£3.4 billion in Wales, and a UK MinistryScotland for Employment Rights we will be able. a
Labour in government will give around to do much more.:;
7OO, OOO Scottish workers a pay rise
Wales led the first industrial revolutionwhen we introduce a Real Living Wage and with a Labour government inof £lO an hour.
Westminster, we will be at the forefront:.:.; We will also provide Scotland with at of the Green Industrial Revolution_.... least around £lOO billion of additional of the future. We will create jobs in:. resources over two terms. This
Wales through environmental energy;;; investment will transform Scotland’s schemes such as the Swansea Bay.;:.. people, communities, public services tidal lagoon project.;:
and industries.
The Tories have let down the people.... As part of that additional resource of Ynys Mon (Anglesey) by failing to;.. Labour would want to see £lO billion deliver the Wylfa project. Labour will.;;. from our new National Transformation work with people on the island to:;.
oo,; Fund invested in the building of l2O, OOO maximise its potential for new nuclear;..,. council and social homes in Scotland energy, alongside investment in.
over the next ten years, ending the renewables housing crisis and creating up to
Nine years of Tory cuts have done5O, OOO jobs.
untold damage and the Thomas-:.,; This is the difference a UK Labour
Commission on Justice in Wales is clear oo..; government would make to Scotland that the justice system is not working for Wales. Labour governments in WalesAs part of our Green Industrial and Westminster will work together, Revolution we will invest £6 billion in using the Commission’s report, to putretrofitting houses across Scotland, that right. which will help tackle the climate emergency at the same time as
Three years on from the 2Ol6 EU-°.
lowering bills, ending fuel poverty referendum we understand much:... and creating 35, OOO jobs.
more about how Wales will be uniquely exposed to a hard Brexit. Only LabourA UK Labour government will also will put this decision back in the handsprovide the Scottish National of the people, and in Wales the WelshInvestment Bank, under Scottish
Labour government will campaigncontrol, with £2O billion of lending to remain. power to deliver funds to local projects and Scotland’s small businesses.
84IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGELabour believes that Scottish independence would be economically devastating and it would be the many not the few who would pay the price.
Scotland needs the transformative investment coming from a Labour government, not another referendum and not independence.
A UK Labour government will focus on tackling the climate emergency, ending austerity and cuts, and getting Brexit sorted. That’s why in the early years of a UK Labour government we will not agree to a Section 3O order request if it comes from the Scottish Government.
TACKLE POVERTY AND INEQUALITY8586IT'S TIME FOR REAL CHANGETHE FINAL
SAY ON
BREXITl
< -
Labour will give theOnly a Labour government will put this decision people the final sayin the hands of the people to give you the final say.
on Brexit. Within threeThis will be a legally binding referendum and we months of comingwill implement the people’s decision immediately.
to power, a Labour.;;. The Tories have failed for three years to get Brexit government will secure.. sorted, in a shambles of repeated delays and a sensible deal. And;; weeuncertainty. Whether people voted Leave or Remain within six months, we9Ol6d busi. tf in, people and businesses are crying out for will put that deal to aes P. P.. ang.. politicians in Westminster to finally focus on the public vote alongside... wider challenges we face.
the option to remain.
A Labour governmentLabour rules out a nodeal Brexit, and we will end the will implement whateverscandal of billions of pounds of taxpayers’ money the people decide. being wasted on nodeal preparations. No deal has never been a viable option. It would do enormous harm to jobs, rights, security and to our NHS.
Labour has led the campaign to stop a nodeal Brexit.
A majority Tory government would pose a renewed threat of the UK crashing out with no deal. Only a
Labour government can prevent this.
THE FINAL SAY ON BREXIT89We will rip up the deeply flawed+ Dynamic alignment on workers’ rights, deal negotiated by Boris Johnson. consumer rights and environmental
We opposed his deal precisely becauseprotections so that UK standards keep it would do such harm to workers’ rights, pace across Europe as a minimum, environmental protections and to ourallowing the UK to lead the way, manufacturing industry. not fall behind.
Boris Johnson’s deal is even worse than* Continued participation in EU
Theresa May's: it would leave the UKagencies and funding programmes,
£7O billion worse off by 2O29; it wouldincluding in such vital areas of give the green light to deregulationco-operation as the environment, undermining UK manufacturing; and itscientific research and culture.
would leave our NHS at the mercy of:...+ Clear commitments on future security a trade deal with Donald Trump. This::; arrangements, including access to the sell-out deal is unacceptable to Labour.
European Arrest Warrant and shared
Labour will secure a new Brexit dealdatabases, making people safer at
- one that protects jobs, rights andhome and abroad.
the environment, avoids a hard border.... Labour will secure a revised Withdrawal in Northern Ireland and protects the::. Agreement that provides legal protection
Good Friday Agreement and the peace. a:;:. for citizens’ rights, meets our international process. We will also ensure that there is.,.;;. obligations - particularly with regard no change in the status or sovereignty.; to the Good Friday Agreement - and of Gibraltar.. as.
ensures an appropriate transition period
Our deal will be based on the principlesto allow businesses and citizens to we have set out over the last two years. adapt to any new arrangements.
It will include: We will also secure robust and legally; binding protections for workers’ rights,
- A permanent and comprehensive... leconsumer standards and environmental
UKwide customs union, which is vital:; i. protections, and ensure level-playingto protect our manufacturing industry.. an.. field protections are maintained. Labour and allows the UK to benefit from joint‘A:'that put will never accept an outcome that puts
UKEU trade deals, and is backed by: P: P;. rights and standards at risk.
businesses and trade unions.... Once we have secured this new deal
* Close alignment with the Single::.. we will put it to a legally binding
Market - ensuring we have a strong]:.; i, referendum alongside the option future economic relationship with theoo,. of remaining in the EU.
EU that can support UK businesses.
This will take place within the first six months of a Labour government.
9OIT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGELabour is the only party that canfarmers, our fishing industry and heal the harmful divisions in ourprotection for our natural environment.
communities and address theLab: the h b Bts of abour recognises the huge benefits o devastation caused by lO years of:;: 9gI... immigration to our country. Many British austerity, ruthlessly imposed on society..... citizens have benefited from freedom by the Tories and Lib Dems. While other:.: anof movement, which has given them parties have exacerbated polarisation,::. the opportunity to study, work or retire defining everyone by how they voted;:::; abroad. Likewise our public services and in the 2Ol6 EU Referendum, Labour has::.. oa. our industry have benefited from skilled consistently reached across this divide.:
workers coming here.
Only Labour will deliver a final say:...
Labour believes that citizens’ rights referendum.
should never have been used as
Only Labour will offer the choice ofa bargaining chip in the Brexit remaining in the EU, or leaving withnegotiations, and recognises the huge a sensible deal. anxiety this has caused for the three million EU nationals living in the UK and
This final say referendum will not be a; g; oo. the l.2 million UK nationals who have rerun of 2Ol6. It will be legally binding..; a_. made their home elsewhere in the EU.
Labour will implement the decision of the British people immediately. We will end the uncertainty created by a. aethe EU Settlement Scheme by granting
Labour will introduce legislation to....;. EU nationals the automatic right to facilitate this referendum and to provide:. oo,...; continue living and working in the UK.
legal certainty and stability following;;
This new declaratory system will allow the result.;:
EU nationals the chance to register
We will introduce a Withdrawalfor proof of status if they wish, but will
Agreement and Referendum Bill, mean they no longer have to apply providing the legal basis to conductto continue living and working in this and implement the outcome of thecountry. This will help ensure reciprocal referendum. treatment for UK citizens living in the.. aeEU. It will also prevent a repeat of the
We will scrap the Brexit legislation;;. shameful Windrush scandal and avoid currently proposed by the Tories and; oo,. oowo. unnecessarily criminalising hundreds introduce new legislation that is in line:. ye, of thousands of EU nationals.
with Labour's priorities and principles to protect our economy, trade, jobsIf in a referendum the British people and rights. decide to remain in the EU, this must oweaenot mean accepting the status quo.
This will include new legislation to::; Labour will work with partners across ensure support and certainty for UK;
Europe to make the case for radical
THE FINAL SAY ON BREXITalreform of the EU - in particular to ensure that its collective strength is focused on tackling the climate emergency, tax evasion and ending austerity and inequality.
The EU needs a new political direction and, if the people decide the UK should remain in the EU, Labour will lead the way to ensure that change.
For too long a politically inflicted wave of austerity has damaged communities across Britain and across Europe.
The most vulnerable members in our society have suffered, while the super-rich continue to be rewarded by a system that allows them to thrive at the expense of the manu.
This must change. If the country decides to remain, a Labour government will take a different approach and strive to ensure that the EU works for people across our communities. The EU should focus on policies that value investment, protect public services and make those who have the most pay their fair share.
If people decide to leave, a Labour government will work constructively with the EU on vital issues of mutual interest and to the mutual benefit of the UK and EU. But we will leave the EU.
Most importantly, under a Labour government, you will get the final say on Brexit.
92IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEANEW
INTERNATIONALISM
95 ANEW INTERNATIONALISM
97EFFECTIVE DIPLOMACY lOO DEFENCE AND SECURITY lO3. INTERNATIONAL SOLIDARITY
AND SOCIAL JUSTICE
\>G
>, a;\
I ac ' /§. ANEW INTERNATIONALISM \
Labour will put humanInternational peace and security will be a primary rights, international lawobjective of a Labour government's foreign policy.
and tackling climateBritain deserves better than the Conservatives’ change at the heart of our - reckless approach to complex global challenges or international policies, and - the outsourcing of UK foreign policy to US President use our global influenceDonald Trump.
to end the ‘bomb first,. a.. oean; Failed military interventions in countries like talk later’ approach to:;;.. Libya have worsened security across North Africa, security. Labour will;.. accelerating the refugee crisis.
always do what is needed to protect the security ofOur approach will be based on our values.
people in the UK. Within the first year of government Labour will:
- Introduce a War Powers Act to ensure that no prime minister can bypass Parliament to commit to conventional military action. Unlike the
Conservatives, we will implement every single recommendation of the Chilcot Inquiry.
ANEW INTERNATIONALISM95* Conduct an audit of the impact of
Britain’s colonial legacy to understand our contribution to the dynamics of violence and insecurity across regions previously under British colonial rule.
- Invest an additional £4OO million in our diplomatic capacity to secure Britain’s role as a country that promotes peace, delivers ambitious global climate agreements and works throughI international organisations to secure political settlements to critical issues.
96IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEeee eh
Internationalism is atWe will:
the core of the Labour;;;.,.* Establish a judge-led inquiry into our country’s movement. We recognisea,.
a aealleged complicity in rendition and torture, our responsibility to.
ceo. and the operation of secret courts.
confront injustices we see today and to correct the* Issue a formal apology for the Jallianwala Bagh injustices of the past. massacre, and hold a public review into Britain’s role in the Amritsar massacre.
- Allow the people of the Chagos Islands and their descendants the right to return to the lands from which they should never have been removed.
* Uphold the human rights of the people of West
Papua and recognise the rights of the people of
Western Sahara.
We have a duty to stand up for the security and sovereignty of our overseas territories, including the
Falklands, and for the rights of our citizens and dualnationals abroad, and will continue fighting for justice
A NEW INTERNATIONALISM97on behalf of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffethe Rohingya community in Myanmar and other British nationals wronglyand the indiscriminate bombardment of imprisoned or suffering mistreatmentcivilians in Yemen.
in captivity abroad..
+ We will work through the UN and the Commonwealth to insist on the. protection of human rights for Sri
Human Rightso.,:;
Lanka’s minority Tamil and Muslim
Human rights and internationalpopulations.
humanitarian law are fundamental.::.+ Appoint human-rights advisers pillars of a secure global system. These;;. to work across the Foreign Office and principles are under threat. Some of the,.; government to prioritise a coordinated world’s most powerful states choose to:;. approach to human rights.
sell arms to human-rights abusing states.
Conservative ministers, including Boris+ Advocate for human rights at every
Johnson, have signed off well overbilateral diplomatic meeting.
£2 billion of arms sales to repressive regimes since June 2Ol7.
Climate Diplomac
Around the world, human rightsPy defenders and civil society activistsThere is no greater injustice today than remain vulnerable to attacks, often carriedcountries in the Global South paying out with impunity. the price for a climate crisis they did not: cause. Yet some world leaders, including
We will::-
US President Donald Trump and Brazilian
- Immediately suspend the sale of armsPresident Jair Bolsonaro, champion a to Saudi Arabia for use in Yemen and toclimate-change denial agenda.
Israel for arms used in violation of theyok:; aBritain's climate-change diplomacy human rights of Palestinian civilians, and;;- was respected internationally, playing conduct a root-and-branch reform of::;:._. an important role in securing the Paris our arms exports regime so ministers..;. Agreement, following the leading role can never again turn a blind eye to.:.; the UK played in securing the Kyoto
British-made weapons being used.. La. Agreement. However, Boris Johnson - to target innocent civilians...
who has described global warming as a
* Reform the international rules-‘primitive fear... without foundation’ - has based order to secure justice andoverseen a 6O% cut in the Uk’s global accountability for breaches of humannetwork of climate experts.
rights and international law, such as: os; co.. Only Labour can rebuild Britain’s the bombing of hospitals in Syria, the;;.. leadership on the most serious threat illegal blockade of the Gaza Strip, the;. to our shared humanity.
use of rape as a weapon of war against
98IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGEWe will: conflict, which must be settled on the... basis of justice and international law.
* Rebuild our climate expertise;;::
a...; All sides must avoid taking action that within the Foreign Office, putting;.. would make peace harder to achieve.
climate diplomacy at the heart of.. That means both an end to the blockade, our foreign policy..
occupation and settlements, and an
- Use our influence at the UN, EU, G7, G2O, end to rocket and terror attacks. Labour
World Bank, the Commonwealth and otherwill continue to press for an immediate global institutions to promote policiesreturn to meaningful negotiations leading to tackle the climate emergency. to a diplomatic resolution. A Labour;.; government will immediately recognise
- Use our diplomatic expertise to... a: the state of Palestine.
negotiate and deliver more ambitious global targets to deal with the climateLabour will take all lawful action emergency, starting with COP 26 innecessary to counter and confront all
Glasgow next year. forms of terrorism, and we will advocate a long-term multinational political strategy, led by regional actors, to tackle the
Prioritising Conflict Preventionspread of extremism.
and Building Peace...
We believe effective diplomacy
The Conservatives have failed to playcan address the drivers of conflict a constructive role in resolving theand insecurity.
world’s most pressing humanitarian... wo. We will:
crises, including in Kashmir, Yemen and
Myanmar, and the escalation of tensions+ Build support for UN reform, with Iran. The treatment of the Kurdishincluding assessing and developing people in Syria, including by Turkey, anddemocratisation initiatives, and of the Uighurs in China has been metimproving the engagement of the with total inaction and apathy by theGeneral Assembly in decision-making to current UK government. In some cases, ensure its institutions are more effective they set aside regard for internationalat achieving peace.
law, including refusing to criticise Crownoo. a.:.+ Prioritise our responsibility to prevent
Prince Mohammed Bin Salman of Saudi;:..... conflict by investing in local capacities
Arabia over the murder of journalist Jamala:. for peacebuilding in areas of conflict
Khashoggi.. as.
- advocating for political, multilateral
Labour is committed to a comprehensivestrategies for peace.
peace in the Middle East based on a two-:..;;- Act immediately to urge negotiations state solution - a secure Israel alongside.;:.. towards a political resolution to conflict a secure and viable state of Palestine...; wherever it arises, including in the Middle
There can be no military solution to this:
East and sub-Saharan Africa.
ANEW INTERNATIONALISM99>I_ a ae. iG i
DEFENCEANDSECURITY I
The primary dutyAn incoming Labour government will undertake a of government is toStrategic Defence and Security Review to assess guarantee the securitythe security challenges facing Britain, including new of people in the UK. forms of hybrid, cyber and remote warfare. This review
Labour’s defencewill also take account of the climate emergency, and policy will be strategicassociated threats of resource competition, involuntary and evidence-led. migration and violent conflict.
Our security at home;. Under the Conservatives:
is made stronger when the security of* Boris Johnson refuses to publish the report others elsewhere isinto possible foreign interference by Russia guaranteed too. in UK democracy.
* Trained army personnel have been cut from lO2, OOO to just over 74, OOO.
- Armed forces and their families have been forced to live in sub-standard accommodation.
+ Failing outsourced contracts have not been terminated.
lOOIT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGE* Our Armed Forces personneland will seek greater consistency in the received below-inflation pay risesimplementation of the Armed Forces for seven years. Covenant by public authorities.
The security challenges we face knowWe will pay a lump sum of £5O, OOO no borders. Labour will increase fundingto each surviving British nuclear-test for UN peacekeeping operations toveteran to support them and their
£lOO million. We will maintain ourfamilies with the health conditions commitment to NATO and our closethey have suffered as a result of relationship with our European partners, exposure to radiation. We will also and we will use our influence at theensure that black and Asian soldiers
United Nations to support peace andwho fought in Britain’s colonial armies security worldwide. receive a full apology and explore ways to compensate them for the
Labour supports the renewal of thea; discriminatory demob payments they
Trident nuclear deterrent. Labour:::..; received compared to their white will also actively lead multilateral:
oo. counterparts serving at the same rank efforts under our obligations to the::.. in the same regiments.
Non-Proliferation Treaty to create a nuclear-free world. The UK defence industry is world-,; leading and Labour will continue to
Labour's commitment to spend at least::; work with manufacturers, unions and
2% of GDP on defence will guarantee.:;; export partners in line with Labour's that our armed forces are versatile andforeilou t. tj oreign policy to support innovation capable of fulfilling the full range of:9 policyPP:
oo. in this sector to ensure it maintains roles and obligations.::.
its highly skilled workforce and worldWe will scrap the public sector payclass apprenticeship programme. We cap, which resulted in a real-termsare committed to procurement that pay cut for our armed forces, ensuresupports UK defence manufacturing decent housing for forces membersincluding our aerospace and and their families, and guarantee bettershipbuilding, alongside a vibrant access for all forces children to goodsupply chain that includes the British quality local schools. We will consultsteel industry and other component on creating a representative body formanufacturing companies providing the armed forces, akin to the Policegood jobs throughout supply chains.
Federation. Labour will publish a Defence Industrial a. aStrategy White Paper, including a
Labour will improve opportunities for:; a. National Shipbuilding Strategy, that veterans through access to lifelong..; keeps all Royal Navy and Royal Fleet learning and training, housing and7; a;;. Auxiliary shipbuilding contracts in the mental and physical health services,
ANEW INTERNATIONALISMlOlUK, to secure a long-term future for the industry and its workers.
Reducing our carbon footprint can only happen with ambitious emissions reduction targets at the Ministry of
Defence, one of government's biggest energy users. So as part of our Green
Industrial Revolution, we will create a Climate Change Sustainability
Committee within the department to review the feasibility of increasing the use of sustainable energy in defence, and publish a strategy to accelerate the safe and sustainable recycling of our old nuclear submarines.
lO2IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGESe Oe, Sie
The scale of theLabour will use Britain’s influence within the World challenges facing ourBank, IMF and WTO to transform the rules of the world are enormous. global economy so they work for the many.
Conflict, climate change.: oo,
We recognise the need to address historic injustices and a global economy;... a.. and will reset our relationships with countries in the rigged in favour of a tiny, ae an_Global South based on principles of redistribution elite are driving instability..... and equality, not outdated notions of charity or and inequality across the;.... imperialist rule. Unlike the Conservatives, Labour world. A boldinternational -.... is fully committed to a standalone Department for development policy driven.;; eeInternational Development (DfID), with an aid budget by social justice has never::.
of at least O.7% of gross national income. We will been more needed.:;:; introduce the reduction of inequality as a goal for all aid spending alongside existing poverty reduction and gender equality goals.
For the Conservatives, too often humanitarian aid is undermined by their disastrous foreign policy, as in
Yemen. Under Labour, we will ensure policy coherence across our international-facing departments. Under
ANEW INTERNATIONALISMlO3Labour, DfID will continue to responddamage in their operations and supply to the world’s biggest crises and willchains, including criminal liability in the ensure humanitarian aid is providedmost serious cases.
according to need, not whether the:..+ Implement a gender transformative
UK has commerical or other interests::.; approach across all our international in the country. DfID will assume a;;-_:
ce. work, including tripling funding for strong position in cross-government; oo
_. i,. grassroots women’s organisations decision making, including a permanent.:.. and establishing an independent seat on the Export Control Joint Unit;... ombudsman to tackle abuse in the responsible for licensing arms exports.
development sector.
Our international programme. oo. oo... Labour believes in climate justice.
will be based on human rightsan. Wealthy countries like the UK bear the and gender equality. a:
greatest responsibility for the climate
We will: emergency. Countries in the Global.. South that have done the least to cause
* Uphold basic rights to education,::
ol. climate change are already facing the health and clean water by establishing;-.:: worst impacts, such as rising sea levels, a new Unit for Public Services; no:. aemore frequent hurricanes and greater within DfID, which will include:;;... food insecurity. We have a duty to right increasing direct budgetary support.; this wrong.
to governments so they can build sustainable services for their citizens. We will:
* Promote fairer international tax rules+ Provide a topup of new and and help countries in the Global Southadditional spending on international build progressive tax systems toclimate finance to bring the total to finance essential public services.£4 billion a year, and also support..; international calls for compensation
* Support trade unions internationally.:... to those nations already suffering loss in their efforts to promote collective
_and damage.
bargaining for better pay and conditions, and include binding social* Stop all aid spending on fossil fuel chapters in trade agreements toproduction overseas, redirecting it safeguard workers’ rights. towards clean, renewable energy.. for all.
* Support ongoing UN efforts to introduce a binding international treaty on business+ End all UK Export Finance support and human rights, and make companiesto fossil fuel projects, and reject any legally accountable for failing to preventtrade deals that conflict with our human rights abuses or environmentalclimate principles.
lO4IT’S TIME FOR REAL CHANGE* Undertake a root-and-branch reform+ Introduce legislation to ensure of CDC Group ple (DfID’s principaltransparency and parliamentary vehicle for encouraging privatescrutiny of trade and investment sector investment in developingagreements.
countries), transforming it into a green.
+ Reject any trade agreements that development bank mandated to.
undermine labour standards or fight poverty, inequality and climate:.
henvironmental protections, and rule change.
gout UK Export Finance support to
Labour respects the crucial role playedcompanies engaged in bribery or by small-scale farmers the world over incorruption.
guaranteeing people the right to food.;;:
Labour recognises the right to essential
We will: medicines as an integral part of the right to health.
- Establish an aid-funded Food9
Sovereignty Fund to enable smallWe will:
scale farmers in the Global Southa:.+ Promote fairer international patent to gain access to land, seeds and... oo. regimes that do not prevent countries finance, and uphold indigenous::_.,. from accessing essential medicines peoples’ right to land.; and support efforts to increase the
- Support sustainable local food andtransparency of medicines pricing so agriculture markets in the fight againstgovernments can negotiate fair prices.
climate change.
+ In the long term, ensure that all
Labour believes human rights shouldmedicines developed with the support drive our trade policy. of UK taxpayer money are accessible. to people in the Global South.
We will:
* Implement UK arms export controls to the highest standard, putting an end to exports where they might be used in violation of human rights or international humanitarian law.
- Ensure government procurement contracts are not granted to companies that are complicit in serious human rights abuses, and require all UK trade agreements to be consistent with international humanitarian law.
ANEW INTERNATIONALISMlO5l29O4_l9 Reproduced from electronic media, promoted by Jennie Formby, General Secretary, the Labour Party, on behalf of the Labour Party, both at, Southside, lO5 Victoria Street, London, SWlE 6QT.