Get Brexit Done7 e e 9 Z q
Unleash Britain’s ~
PotentialFw eee y
The Conservonist Partyaes
Manifesto 2--- ze 'My Guarantee
If there is a majority of Conservative MPs on December l3th, I guarantee I will get our new deal through Parliament. We will get Brexit done in January and unleash the potential of our whole country.
I guarantee:
¢ Extra funding for the NHS, with 5O, OOO more nurses and 5O million more GP surgery appointments a year.
¢ 2O, OOO more police and tougher sentencing for criminals.
¢ An Australian-style points-based system to control immigration.
¢ Millions more invested every week in science, schools, apprenticeships and infrastructure while controlling debt.
¢ Reaching Net Zero by 2O5O with investment in clean energy solutions and green infrastructure to reduce carbon emissions and pollution.
¢ We will not raise the rate of income tax, VAT or National Insurance.
If Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour and Nicola Sturgeon’s SNP team up and take control on December l3th, we will have two referendums on Brexit and
Scotland in 2O2O.
Please support a majority Conservative Government so our country can move on instead of going backwards. Contents
INTPOCUCTION onic ccoccmmmnmnnnununinnnunnntunnunnnnunnnnnnnnnunn
Get Brexit DONE ooo cccmmmunsuuntunsunnntansannsase D
We Will Focus On Your Priorities OOOm
We Will Unleash Britain’s Potential... 25
We Will Strengthen Britain In The World... 5l
We Will Put YOU First. ccmmsnussnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnnyY
The Conservative and Unionist
Party Manifesto 2Ol9Introducti
For the last three and a half years, this country has felt trapped, like a lion in a cage. We have all shared the same frustration - like some super-green supercar blocked in the traffic. We can see the way ahead. We know where we want to go - and we know why we are stuck.
We have been paralysed by a brokenyears ahead: to unite and level up, spreadingstreets, and giving them the powers to tackle
Parliament that simply refuses to deliveropportunity across the whole Unitedcrime with stop and search.
Brexit. And that is why this election is soKingdom.
essential. Everyone in the UK should have the peace
The UK has extraordinary advantages. Weof mind and confidence that come from
Get Brexit done - and we end the divisionlead the world in 2lst-century technologies, world-class health care - and so this new and deadlock that have beenso bad forour _ from batteries to bioscience. We haveOne Nation Conservative Government politics. many of the best universities on earth. is giving the NHS its biggest ever cash
There are parts of this country that areboost, with 2O hospital upgrades and 4O
Get Brexit done - and we restoremore productive and more innovative thannew hospitals, while delivering 5O, OOO confidence and certainty to businesses and - anywhere else in Europe. more nurses and 6, OOO more doctors and families. creating an extra 5O million general practice
And yet there are parts of the countryappointments a year.
Get Brexit done - and we will see a pent-upthat feel left behind. Talent and genius tidal wave of investment into our country. are uniformly distributed throughout theIf this Conservative Government is returned country. Opportunity is not. Now is the timeto office, we will have an infrastructure
Get Brexit done - and we can focus on theto close that gap - not just because it makes __ revolution for this country. Now is the time priorities of the British people, funding thesuch obvious economic sense, but for theto invest in Northern Powerhouse Rail, and
NHS and tackling the cost of living. sake of simple social justice. the Midlands Rail Hub, and so many more projects, as well as a massive programme
Get Brexit done - and we can release thatWe Conservatives believe passionately thatof improvements for our roads and gigabit lion from its cage and take this amazingevery child should have the same opportunity - broadband for every home and business.
country forwards. to express their talents and make the most of their lives - and that is why we are investingWe will invest in technology and innovation.
And as things stand, there is only one way£l4 billion over three years to increase funding And we will invest in Britain’s people by to get Brexit done - and thatis to returnafor every primary and everysecondaryschool __ giving them the tools and training to
Conservative Government with a workingpupil in the country. flourish in the economy of the 2lst century.
majority on December l2th.
I want everyone to have the fundamentalWe are the only party that can deliver this
I am very proud of the achievements of thissecurity that comes from safe streets andprogramme, because we are the only party
Government in its first lOO days. We havesafe neighbourhoods - so we are backing our - that understands the balance and symmetry mapped out a fantastic programme for thepolice, putting 2O, OOO more officers on theat the heart of the UK economy.
2We believe in superb public services andWe will run an ever stronger and morein days. It is oven-ready - and every single infrastructure, not just because they are good dynamic economy. Conservative candidate at this election, all 635 things in themselves, but because they are theof them, have pledged to vote for this deal as bedrock of a dynamic free market economy. We will defend and protect our Unitedsoon as Parliament returns.
Kingdom - the awesome foursome that
And there is only one way to pay formake up the most successful politicalAnd what is Jeremy Corbyn's alternative? A world-class health care and outstandingpartnership in history. new negotiation, and then a new referendum infrastructure - and that is to foster and-and he still cannot tell us what side he would encourage the millions of British businesses, We are proud of our Armed Forces, and willbe on: in or out, Remain or Leave.
large and small, that create the wealth ofalways fund them properly.
the nation. Their success is our success. It isIt is a recipe for chaos - compounded by thanks to the innovations of British battery-Jeremy Corbyn is prepared to break up theasecond referendum on Scotland. This makers and turbine designers that we areUK, to disband the Armed Forces, and evencountry has had enough of dither and delay, able to cut CO2 - and achieve our goal ofwhen it comes to cold-blooded murderof defeatism and despair.
being carbon neutral by 2O5O. on British soil, he cannot stand up for our country and do what is right. We don't want to waste 2O2O on two
Itis precisely because we understand theacrimonious referendums. We want next concept of aspiration, and enterprise, thatWe will stand up for our country and ouryear to be a year of hope, of prosperity and the UK is now leading a new green industrialvalues around the world. growth.
revolution.
Above all, we Conservatives will respect theWe want to move on, with our programme of
The tragedy of the modern Labour Partydemocratic will of the people. After threeinvestment in education, infrastructure and under Jeremy Corbyn is that they detest theand a half years of procrastination, we havetechnology, to create a high-wage, high-skill, profit motive so viscerally - and would raisea great new deal that is ready to gosothat low-tax economy.
taxes so wantonly - that they would destroywe will be finally out of the EU by January 3l.
the very basis of this country's prosperity. We want to get Brexit done so that we can
Weare able to deliver all the advantagesget on with our work of making Britain the
If you want to understand the impact of aof leaving the EU: making our own laws, greatest place in the world to live, to go to
Corbyn Government on ordinary people, controlling our own borders, taking backschool, to start a family, to own a home, to remember that he has voted against taxour money, and exercising all kinds of newstart a business - with the most ambitious cuts worth £78OO for people on modestfreedoms. environmental programme of any country incomes. He is already committed toon earth.
putting up corporation tax to one of theFrom freeports to free trade deals, from highest levels in Europe. abolishing the cruel live shipment ofLet's get Brexit done, and take this country animals to cutting VAT on tampons, we inforward.
And what will he do for an encore? Embarkthe UK will be able to remain close to our ona spending and borrowing spree thatEuropean friends and partners; but whereBoris Johnson would cost every taxpayer £2,4OO a year, we choose, we will be able to do thingsPrime Minister as well as confiscating lO per cent of thedifferently and better.
value of our most prominent businesses and putting those assets in the hands of JohnWith a new Parliament anda sensible majority
McDonnell. What madness. Government, we can get that deal through aie ey ae, a he ':
t ig?_
Be A
4 -~,:
FaeWhen the new Government entered Downing Street, the Prime Minister made a simple promise: to get Brexit done. Many said it would be impossible. But he swiftly negotiated a great new deal - despite Parliament's best efforts to block his progress.
And then, when he put it to MPs, they insisted on yet more delay.
We must move on. No more renegotiations. No more referendums. Every week is costing us.
Investment is waiting to come into the country. Families and businesses cannot make vital decisions. The public services cannot get the attention they deserve.
Our priority as Conservatives is to getOur deal is the only one on the table. ItWe will negotiate a trade agreement next
Brexit done - so that we can unleashis signed, sealed and ready. It puts theyear - one that will strengthen our Union - the potential of this great country. Sowhole country on a path to a new freeand we will not extend the implementation that we can push past the obstaclestrade agreement with the EU. This will beperiod beyond December 2O2O. In parallel, that other parties have put in oura new relationship based on free tradewe will legislate to ensure high standards of country’s way. So that we can deliverand friendly cooperation, not on the EU’sworkers rights, environmental protection on the people’s decision in 2Ol6 andtreaties or EU law. There will be no political ©§ and consumer rights.
use our new post-Brexit freedoms toalignment with the EU. We will keep the transform the UK for the better byUK out of the single market, out of anyThe only way to deliver Brexit is with a focusing on your priorities. form of customs union, and end the roleConservative majority in Parliament. A of the European Court of Justice. vote for any other party or candidate is a
If we elect a majority of Conservativevote for Jeremy Corbyn - and a vote for
MPs to Parliament, we will startThis future relationship will be one thatmore chaos.
putting our deal through Parliamentallows us to:
before Christmas and we will leave the> Take back control of our laws.
European Union in January.> Take back control of our money.
»icy.
Boris Johnson's new deal takes the wholeControl our own trade policy, country out of the EU as one United, introaice an as tralian sty le pointsKingdom. It takes us out of the customsase immigra on s¥s em.; union, allowing us to set our own tariffs4Raise standards in areas like workers rights, animal welfare, agriculture and and do our own trade deals. It allows us to:
athe environment.
pass our own laws and ensures that it is; our courts that enforce them.»Ensure we are in full control of our fishing waters.
5» ee~~ Jonath a'Candir Stokeon-, A
~\,; I’ >
Prees r; _E, "--'cd ean ae ns3:~For the past nine years, the Conservatives have been cleaning up Labour’s mess. Because of the tough decisions that our party made and our success in bringing down the deficit, the economy has continued to grow and the public finances have been restored. Thanks to
Conservative policies, employment is at a near-record high.
We've helped millions of people intoWe will keep costs down for smallWe will also prioritise the environment work, halving the unemployment rate. businesses - rather than hiking theirin the next Budget, investing in the
We’ve doubled the personal allowancetaxes and crushing Britain's prosperity. infrastructure, science and research that to £l2,5OO, meaning that every workerwill deliver economic growth, not just gets to keep more of what they earn. We will not borrow to fund dayto-daythrough the 2O2Os, but for decades to
We’ve introduced and consistentlyspending, but will invest thoughtfullycome.
raised the National Living Wage - andand responsibly in infrastructure right will raise it still further. across our country in order to increaseAbove all, we will listen to the people productivity and wages. Our fiscal ruleswho have felt left behind by the last few
The strength of the UK’s balance sheetmean that public sector net investmentdecades of economic growth and want to
- the hard work done by all of us in thiswill not average more than 3 percentof have more control of their future.
country - means that we are nowinaGDP, and that if debt interest reaches 6 position to invest properly in our future. per cent of revenue, we willreassess our Wewill get Brexit done, so we can plans to keep debt under control. unleash Britain’s potential.
A Conservative Government will give the public services the resources they need, -_ This means that debt will be lower at supporting our hospitals, our schoolsthe end of the Parliament - rather than and our police. We will help peoplespiralling out of control under Labour.
and families throughout their lives byAnd we will use this investment prudently bringing down the cost of living andand strategically to level up every part of making sure that work always pays. the United Kingdom, while strengthening the ties that bind it together.
7NHS Trust f_ ai
¥Iyw@ or} * I ae IYp@@@
In his first months in office, the Prime Minister has shown how he intends to make life better for everyone in the UK. Supporting our police. Increasing funding for our schools. Building new hospitals.
We have listened to you, and we have acted. Acted to ensure that we deliver world-class public services so that you can have the help and support you need throughout your life. And we want to take that agenda further.
But none of it will happen without a Conservative majority Government.
We as Conservatives believe passionately And weare proud to have confirmed a
Strengthen thein the NHS. Because we believe thatrecord £34 billion per year by the end
NHS a nd socialeveryone deserves the chance to live free - of the Parliament in additional funding of sickness and disease - and to knowfor the NHS - and to have begun work carethat if they do fall ill, our brilliant NHSon building 4O new hospitals across the staff will be there for them. country, as well as investing in hospital
The NHS represents the best of thisupgrades and new machines to boost early country. It is there for us when ourWe are proud that since its foundation, it I cancer diagnosis across 78 hospital trusts.
children are born, when our friendsis the Conservative Party that has acted and families fall sick, when our lovedas the steward and guardian of the NHSBut we want to do more.
ones succumb to old age and ill health. -_andits principles for 44 of its 7l years. We are proud that it is coping withincreasing - Within the first three months of our
It is precious to all of us - especiallydemand, with more doctors and nurses, new term, we will enshrine in law our because it is free at the point of use andand using more advanced treatmentsfully funded, long-term NHS plan. This there for you on the basis of need, notthan ever before. is the largest cash settlement in NHS your ability to pay. history. One that is only possible because
9we have delivered the growth andOu rNH S People Plan prosperity to pay for world-class public services - and will continue to do so.
The l.4 million dedicated staff who> Wewill introduce an NHS Visa. Our
Between 2Ol8 and 2O23, we will havedeliver world-class care day in, day outNHS People Plan will ensure that we raised funding for the NHS by 29 perare at the heart of the NHS. Our coretrain and employ tens of thousands cent. By the end of the Parliament, thatpriority is to make sure this workforcemore NHS professionals here in the will be more than £65O million extracan grow and has the support it needsUK. But we also want to make sure that a week. And we will ensure this money- in terms of numbers, training andthose from overseas who want to work goes to the frontline so that you andresources. That means that if you do fallin and support our NHS are encouraged your family get appointments moreill, you'll get the care and attention youto do so. That is why qualified doctors, quickly and experience improved care. deserve. nurses and allied health professionals with a job offer from the NHS, who have
We believe that the best way to improveWe will deliver: been trained to a recognised standard, the NHS and meet rising demand is toand who have good working English, will invest in its most important asset - its» 5O, OOO more nurses, with studentsbe offered fast-track entry, reduced visa people. That is why we are devotingreceiving a £5, OOO-£8, OOO annualfees and dedicated support to come to additional funding, on top of our existingmaintenance grant every year duringthe UK with their families.
record settlement, to hire and supporttheir course to help with their cost more doctors, nurses and other healthof living - and they won't have to payOur new funding will deliver 5O million professionals. it back. Everyone will receive at leastextra general practice appointments
£5, OOO with further funding in regionsor a year, an increase of over l5 per disciplines that are struggling to recruitcent. That means that if you need an
- such as mental health -- and help with appointment, waiting times will be their childcare costs. shorter and you'll get the service you
> Wewill build and fund 4O newdeserve.
hospitals over the next lO years. This» 6, OOO more doctors in general is on top of the 2O hospital upgradespractice and 6, OOO more primary careWe also want to make sure that announced in the summer. We willprofessionals, such as physiotherapistsdoctors spend as much time as roll out cancer diagnostic machinesand pharmacists. This is on top of thepossible treating patients, so we will across 78 hospital trusts to boost7,5OO extra nurse associates andaddress the ‘taper problem’ in doctors’ early diagnosis. We are committed to2O, OOO primary care professionals that pensions, which causes many to turn reducing health inequality. We willwe have already announced. down extra shifts for fear of high tax continue to repair the damage donebills. Within our first 3O days, we will by Labour’s disastrous PFI deals.>» Wewill improve staff morale with more hold an urgent review, working with funding for professional training andthe British Medical Association and
> Wewill invest in preventing diseasemore supportive hospital management. Academy of Medical Royal Colleges to as well as curing it. We will tackle thesolve the problem.
lOssNatalie Neale
4Candidate for Leicester South
‘NHS Nurse. such as cancer or autoimmune disease, health technology summit.
or for children with other rare diseases.> Wewill support our precious
If you or a loved one is unlucky enoughhospices, developing the plans already to fall ill, we'll ensure you have accessannounced by Boris Johnson to secure to the best available medicines. We willtheir future, with a £25 million cash also improve the early diagnosis andinjection in August to support 2OO, OOO treatment of all major conditions. people at the end of their lives.
>» Wewill treat mental health with the> Wewill make the NHS the best place same urgency as physical health. Wein the world to give birth through underlying causes of increases in NHSwill legislate so that patients sufferingpersonalised, high-quality support.
demand, for example via a long-termfrom mental health conditions, And we'll uphold our commitment to strategy for empowering people withincluding anxiety or depression, haveextend healthy life expectancy by lifestyle-related conditions such asgreater control over their treatmentfive years by 2O35.
obesity to live healthier lives, as welland receive the dignity and respect as tackling childhood obesity, heartthey deserve.> Wewill end unfair hospital car parking disease and diabetes. We will continuecharges by making parking free for to promote the uptake of vaccines>» Wewill make it easier for peoplethose in greatest need, including via our national vaccination strategy. with learning disabilities and autismdisabled people, frequent outpatient
We will extend social prescribingto be discharged from hospital andattenders, parents of sick children and expand the new Nationalimprove how they are treated in law. staying overnight and staff working
Academy of Social Prescribing. Wenight shifts. This will eliminate costs for will overhaul NHS screening and use>» Wewill continue to take action tothose in need, while making sure there new technology and mobile screeningtackle gambling addiction. are enough spaces for everyone.
services to prevent ill health. We will focus on helping patients with>» Wewillimprove NHS performance,> Wewill clamp down on health multiple conditions to have simplifiedusing our record funding settlementtourism, ensuring that those from and more joinedup access to theto bring down operating waiting times, overseas who use NHS services pay
NHS. And we will improve hospitalimprove A&E performance and increasetheir fair share. And we will increase food alongside our wider National Foodcancer survival rates. We will studythe NHS surcharge paid by those
Strategy. carefully the recommendations of thefrom overseas.
ongoing review led by NHS clinical staff
>» Wewill develop new treatments forinto A&E and clinical performance.>» When weare negotiating trade serious diseases. We will extend thedeals, the NHS will not be on the successful Cancer Drugs Fund into>» Wewill use frontline technology totable. The price the NHS pays for an Innovative Medicines Fund so thatimprove patients’ experience, providedrugs will not be on the table. The doctors can use the most advanced, flexible working for clinicians, and helpservices the NHS provides will not be life-saving treatments for conditionssave lives. We will also hold an annualon the table.
lImproving social carethe widest possible support, and standsWe need a longthe test of time. That consensus wille
It is a basic, compassionateconsider a range of options but onete rm solution
Conservative belief that we shouldcondition we do make is that nobody4_ care for those in need - helpingneeding care should be forced to sellfo r social care those who cannot help themselves. their home to pay for it. that S why we are
Thanks to decades of economic growthAs a first step, and to stabilise thecommitting to an and scientific innovation, people aresystem, we announced in the autumntH_ living longer, healthier lives. But this, additional funding of £l billion for theambitious three alongside the rise of dementia and otheryear beginning in April 2O2O. We arepoint plan:
chronic conditions, means that thenow confirming this additional funding pressures on the elderly care systemin every year of the new Parliament.
are ever-increasing. There has also beenl) £l billion extra of funding every significant growth in the number ofWe will also extend the entitlement toyear for more social care staff and working-age people with disabilities wholeave for unpaid carers, the majority ofbetter infrastructure, technology need care at a younger age. whom are women, to one week. and facilities.
We need to have a system to give everyWe also want to save millions of people,2) We will commit to urgently seek person the dignity and security thatand their families, from sufferinga cross-party consensus in order they deserve. This is a significant andthe agony of a slow decline due toto bring forward the necessary complex challenge and in order to laydementia. We will make finding a cureproposal and legislation for longthe foundations, we must plan for theone of our Government's biggestterm reform.
infrastructure, workforce growth andcollective priorities - one of the ‘grand healthcare integration that is requiredchallenges’ that will define our future3) The prerequisite of any solution fora care system fit for the 2lst century. along with the impact of climatewill be a guarantee that no one change or artificial intelligence. This willneeding care has to sell their
Because this is a long-term problem thatinclude doubling research funding intohome to pay for it.
will affect so many people, any solutiondementia and speeding up trials for has to be able to survive long-term. new treatments.
We must build the same level of consensus on social care as we haveWe will also provide £74 million over already built on the NHS. three years for additional capacity in community care settings for those
So we will build a cross-partywith learning disabilities and autism.
consensus to bring forward an answer that solves the problem, commands l2Invest in our schoolsIn the last nine years, the percentage of» We will create more great schools.
children passing their primary readingWe will continue to do everything we
Talent is evenly spread in this country, check has gone up from 58 per centcan to ensure every school is a great but opportunity is not. As Conservatives, to 82 per cent. We have strengthenedschool. We will continue to support we believe absolutely in equality ofteachers’ powers to deal with bullyinginnovation, like our successful maths opportunity - the idea that every child, and disruption. We have given schoolsschools, set up for the most gifted young in every part of the country, should havethe ability to decide how money is bestphysicists and mathematicians. We will a fair chance. It is not only the mostspent - because we trust parents andexpand ‘alternative provision’ schools important thing we can do to unleashheadteachers to know what is best forfor those who have been excluded. We the UK’s potential, but is at the heart ofthe children in their care. will also deliver more school places creating a fair and just society. for children with complex Special
For our children to get the training andEducational Needs. We will intervene
This is why we want to ensure every childopportunities they deserve, they needin schools where there is entrenched has access to a great state school - thatto have the best teachers. We want tounderperformance. We will continue every pupil gets the qualifications theyattract the best talent into teaching andto ensure that parents can choose the need for a prosperous future, whilerecognise the great work they do, so we'reschools that best suit their children and learning in an environment where theyraising teachers’ starting salaries tobest prepare them for the future. And we will be happy and fulfilled.£3O, OOO - among the most competitivewill continue to build more free schools.
in the graduate labour market.
In his first months in office, Boris Johnson>» Wewillinvest in arts, music and sport.
announced an extra £l4 billion in fundingWe also want to build on our record ofOver the last nine years we have made for schools. That translates to £l5O millionraising standards, improving behaviourreal improvements in maths, English a week, and will include at least £5, OOO aand promoting knowledge and creativity. and science, and given more children year for each secondary school pupil andaccess to a rich academic curriculum.
at least £4, OOO for each primary school> Wewill back heads and teachersWe retain our commitment to the pupil. This also includes £78O million in newon discipline. We will expand ourcore subjects and also want young funding to support children with Specialprogramme to help schools with thepeople to learn creative skills and
Educational Needs next year alone. worst behaviour learn from the bestwiden their horizons, so we will offer an
- and back heads to use exclusions.‘arts premium’ to secondary schools
One of the Conservative Party's proudestUnlike Labour, we believe that Ofstedto fund enriching activities for all achievements is that we have raisedinspection serves a valuable purposepupils. And to ensure children are standards in our schools and improvednot just in improving standards but ingetting an active start to life, we will behaviour. Students learn best when theyimproving behaviour. We will continueinvest in primary school PE teaching are stretched, challenged and nurtured - into help teachers tackle bullying, and ensure that it is being properly an environment where there is no disruptionincluding homophobic bullying. Nodelivered. We want to do more to help and no excuses for bad behaviour. child should be bullied on account ofschools make good use of their sports who their parents are or where theyfacilities and to promote physical come from. literacy and competitive sport.
l34allowance to £l2,5OO, so that everyone
VulnerableSupport workinggets to earn a decent amount before they fedalivelaciafamiliesare taxed. And we have made sure the state pension keeps pace with earnings.
Since 2OlO, the Conservatives have
Children who end up in care arehelped more than l, OOO people onIn our first months, we announced an more likely to struggle as adults, average into work every day. increase in the National Living Wage denied the love and stability most ofto two thirds of average earnings, us take for granted. We will prioritiseThat is an extraordinary figure. Andithas currently forecast at £lO.5O an hour, stable, loving placements for thoseonly been possible because of the strong and widened its reach to everyone over children - adoption where possibleeconomy we have helped to create; our2l. That means an average pay rise of or foster parents recruited by thesupport for business; and our welfare£4, OOO per year for four million people local authority. We will review thereforms, which have encouraged moreby 2O24.
care system to make sure that allpeople into work. The majority of jobs care placements and settings arecreated since 2OlO have been highTo help young people get a foot on providing children and young adultsquality: full-time and outside Londonthe employment ladder, we abolished with the support they need. and the South East. employers’ National Insurance
Contributions for under-2ls and
Astrong society needs strongWhoever you are, we want to makeapprentices under 25.
families. We will improve theit easier for you to get a good and
Troubled Families programmerewarding job - and to be able toCreating millions more jobs is one of the and champion Family Hubs tocombine a rewarding career with raisingConservatives’ proudest achievements.
serve vulnerable families with thea family or caring for elderly or disabledA Labour Government that makes it intensive, integrated support theyrelatives, rather than being forced toharder for businesses to grow and to hire - need to care for children - from theprioritise between them. We want tothat allows people to sink into dependency early years and throughout theirmake sure that you get to keep more ofrather than encouraging them to work and lives. the money you earn, and that we keepearn - could undo all of this progress.
your bills low. And we want to make sure that those who can’t work, or haveA majority Conservative Government entered retirement, get the level ofwill deliver a major package of measures support they need. designed to ensure that it always pays to work, while doing everything we can to
We have focused, over the past decade, protect and support those who cannot - on making sure that work always paysand to address the cost of living pressures
- particularly for those most in need ofthat we all face.
support. We have raised the minimum wage significantly and introduced and consistently raised the National Living
Wage. We have doubled the personal l4iykty -*
Ae Jaa; a ie TH7
+3 Fanei} \) I
3ML a
Atdj: Si. I4asa]
>» We promise not to raise the rates ofLaiASee7 income tax, National Insurance ortiL: Be: a
VAT. This is a tax guarantee that will7ne protect the incomes of hard-working; i families across the next Parliament. iao
> Wenot only want to freeze taxes,. ] l ] I4 but to cut them too. We will raise"Ft¥ Ai] Ht the National Insurance threshold_- omens ao:”i to £9,5OO next year - representing., I a tax cut for 3l million workers. iJ ] ] ] ]
Our ultimate ambition is to ensureI II] that the first £l2,5OO you earn is5:; completely free of tax - which would;-bes put almost £5OO per year in people'sITih pockets.“iri
> Raising a family should be the mostF. zeo fulfilling experience of your life. But2a for too many parents, the costs ofi:- childcare are a heavy burden. We want_; cer to give parents the freedom, support-_and choice to look after their children:
in the way that works best for them.
We will establish a new £l billion fundl to help create more high quality, a affordable childcare, including before and after school and during the4 school holidays.
>» Formany families, energy costs are a major source of financial pressure.
We will keep our existing energyi4{ cap and introduce new measures7ag to lower bills. We will also give theZjztjBret
Competition and Markets Authorityne asMark Leh ir eek aa enhanced powers to tackle consumerBe -sHidate for Newcastle Snivne W a ye eg rip-offs and bad business practices. ee‘~5 amy icate +4 kiPyEh ee
We recognise that water bills can beia we ‘ and Former Principal of Bedford Free Sc eee any
Laea, ot a4 ce--Soap tage>._ ae; tte,
I: a major source of financial pressure,
Seso will extend the water rebate for those in the South West.
i> Onentering Government in 2OlO, aethe Conservatives acted decisively
--”to protect the UK’s pensioners. The
AT-‘triple lock’ we introduced has meant! that those who have worked hard and put in for decades can be confident i. that the state will be there to support
/‘a F"them when they need it. We will
ATify*keep the triple lock, the winter fuel h,7:. payment, the older person’s bus, iear_-pass and other pensioner benefits,
I "al‘iensuring that older people have the
/security and dignity they deserve.
“ai inWe recognise the value of free TV
4 Z-*licences for over-75s and believe
‘.; Ithey should be funded by the BBC. ' } Do +> Anumber of workers,
Aidisproportionately women, who py”y amearn between £lO, OOO and £l2,5OO xFE-have been missing out on pension fbenefits because of a loophole affecting people with net pay ifpension schemes. We will conduct, a comprehensive review to look at how to fix this issue.
F>» Wewill use our freedom from the EU to improve the UK’s tax regime - not least by abolishing the tampon tax.
IMartin Dowey rieTMCandidate for Ayr, Carrick & Cumnock hg.*Former Police Officer
*uy> To help those looking after familyincrease SEND funding and support.:. ‘aI{ imembers, especially women, wepupils, students and adults to get aj. ii / i: will support the main carer in anycareers advice, internships, and eshousehold receiving the Universaltransition into work. We will reduce
- altCredit payment. And we will continuethe disability employment gap.
ibiour efforts through the tax and benefits system to reduce poverty, including child poverty. ChildrenMake our should grow up in an environmentcou ntry safer with no limits to their potential - which is one of the reasons we areOur first duty as a Government is to
>» We as Conservatives believe thatmaking it a priority to put morekeep our country safe. One of Boris everyone who can work, shouldmoney in the pockets of low-paidJohnson’s first actions as Prime work - and that it should alwaysworkers and maintaining ourMinister was to start recruiting pay them to do so. But we alsocommitment to free school meals.2O, OOO new police officers. These believe that those who truly can’tnew officers will take violent work must be given the help they>» Wewill also extend the entitlementcriminals off the streets and protect need. That is why we will continueto leave for unpaid carers, theus and our country.
the roll-out of Universal Credit, majority of whom are women, to which combines multiple benefitsone week. The Conservatives will always back the into one while building a clearerbrave men and women of our police pathway from welfare into work. We> As part of our efforts to empowerand security services, which is why have already acted to increase workand support disabled people, wewe will empower the police, backing allowances, a move worth £63Owill reduce the number ofthe increased use of stop and search to working families with children, reassessments a disabled personas long as it is fair and proportionate.
and those with disabilities, andmust go through when a significantAnd we will provide them with the we will do more to make sure thatchange in condition is unlikely -equipment they need.
Universal Credit works for the mostbecause you should not have to vulnerable. We will also end theprovide repeated proof of yourWe need a fair justice system - one that benefit freeze, while making sure itdisability in order to receive support. stands for the law-abiding majority, not pays to work more hours. We will publish a National Strategythe criminal minority, and that gives a for Disabled People before thesecond chance to those who have served
» Atthe same time, we will makeend of 2O2O. This will look at waystheir time and wish to make a fresh start.
sure those who cheat the systemto improve the benefits system, by committing benefit fraud areopportunities and access for punished. There is no excuse fordisabled people in terms of housing, exploiting others who have workededucation, transport and jobs. It will hard and paid in. include our existing commitments to l7Adam Wordsworth.
Candidate for Weaver Vale
Former Police OfficerA
ZA#
* I sy> Wewill back our police by equipping r*officers with the powers and tools bothey need to keep themselves and i~~, all of us safe, including tasers and
Sbody cameras. We will put the Police; A e. Covenant into law to ensure they
“4 \have the support they need.
’> Police will be empowered by a new
Icourt order to target known knife
F 2 icarriers, making it easier for officers is3 f 4to stop and search those convicted stIof knife crime. Anyone charged with
TMknife possession will appear before. wlmagistrates within days not weeks.
iThose who use a knife as a weapon should go to prison.
In order to successfully keep our streets safe, we need to turn people away from crime and end the cycle of reoffending:> We will introduce tougher sentencing for the worst offenders
Youth offendingAddictionRehabilitationand end automatic halfway release
Young people are less likely toDrug addiction fuelsWe will create a prisonerfrom prison for serious crimes. For get into trouble in a well-crime, violence and familyeducation service focusedchild murderers, there will be life disciplined school, which isbreakdown - and newon work-based trainingimprisonment without parole.
why we will back teachersdangerous substances areand skills. We will improve to enforce discipline. We aredriving an increase in deathsemployment opportunities> Wewill use our new freedoms after investing £5OO million in youthfrom drug abuse. We willfor exoffenders, including aBrexit to prevent more foreign services for young people. Iftackle drug-related crime, and I job coach in each prison. Thisnational offenders entering our they endanger others, we willat the same time take a newapproach is proven to reducecountry. We will cut the number put them in new alternativeapproach to treatment so wereoffending. We are improving provision schools. If they arecan reduce drug deaths andprison security to protectof foreign nationals in our prisons, offenders, we are triallingbreak the cycle of crime linked I staff, stop drug smuggling andand increase penalties to stop them
Secure Schools. New laws willto addiction. reduce violence. returning.
require schools, police, councils and health authorities to work> Wewill back all those who put their together through Violencelives on the line to keep us safe
Reduction Units to prevent- police and prison officers and serious crime. emergency service workers. We will> Wewill counter the growing threat> Wewill tackle unauthorised pass the Police Protection Bill andof serious and organised crime. Wetraveller camps. We will give the consult on doubling the maximumwill strengthen the National Crimepolice new powers to arrest and sentence for assaulting workers inAgency so it can tackle the threatsseize the property and vehicles of emergency services such as policewe face, from fraud, county linestrespassers who set up unauthorised officers, firefighters and paramedics. gangs and child sexual abuse to illicitencampmernts, in order to protect our finance, modern slavery and people-communities. We will make intentional
> Wewill strengthen thetrafficking. trespass a criminal offence, and we accountability of elected Police andwill also give councils greater powers
Crime Commissioners and expand>» Wewill add lO, OOO more prisonwithin the planning system.
their role. People must have anplaces, with £2.75 billion already accountable local leader delivering oncommitted to refurbishing andSupporting all victims their crime and justice priorities, whocreating modern prisons. of crime they can vote out.
> Wewill maintain the ban onDelivering justice does not just mean
>» Wewill expand electronic taggingprisoners voting from jail. treating defendants fairly, but doing for criminals serving time outsideright by victims. So we will pass jail, including the use of sobriety> Wewill conduct a root-and-branchand implement a Victims’ Law that tags for those whose offending isreview of the parole system toguarantees victims’ rights and the fuelled by alcohol. improve accountability and publiclevel of support they can expect.
safety, giving victims the right to
> Wewill toughen communityattend hearings for the first time, and> Wewill support all victims of sentences, for example by tighteningwe will establish a Royal Commissiondomestic abuse and pass the curfews and making those convictedon the criminal justice process. Domestic Abuse Bill. We will increase do more hours of community paybacksupport for refuges and community to clean up our parks and streets.> We will combat extremism and dosupport for victims of rape and all we can to ensure that extremistssexual abuse. We will pilot integrated
>» Wewill embrace new technologiesnever receive public money. domestic abuse courts that address and crack down on online crimes. criminal and family matters in parallel.
We will create a new national cyber> Wewill keep our country safe from crime force and empower the policeterrorism. We will invest in the> Wewill continue to fight crime to safely use new technologies likepolice and security services andagainst women and girls, including biometrics and artificial intelligence, give them the powers they need torape, Female Genital Mutilation and along with the use of DNA, within acombat new threats. In the wake offorced marriage. Our support for the strict legal framework. We will alsothe terrible events in Manchester inmain carer receiving Universal Credit create a world-class National Crime2Ol7, we will improve the safety andwill help give greater independence
Laboratory. security of public venues. to individuals, most often women, trapped with coercive partners.
l9> Wewill protect people fromFix our immigrationAttracting the best and physical attack or harassmentl whether for their sex, sexualsystemb rightest orientation, ethnicity, religion orWe want the UK to be a magnet for disability, and expand funding forThe vote to leave the EU was, amongthe best and brightest, with special and protect places of worship. Weother things, a vote to take backimmigration routes for those who will vigorously combat harassmentcontrol of our borders. will make the biggest contribution.
and violence against all religiousWe will create bespoke visa schemes groups, and against LGBT people. That is why a majority Conservativefor new migrants who will fill
We will ensure that those whoGovernment will get Brexit done, shortages in our public services, work in countering extremismand then introduce a firmer andbuild the companies and innovations are protected from threats andfairer Australian-style points-basedof the future and benefit Britain for intimidation. We will ban publicimmigration system, so that we canyears to come. These include:
bodies from imposing theirdecide who comes to this country on own direct or indirect boycotts, the basis of the skills they have and> The NHS Visa. Qualified doctors, disinvestment or sanctions campaignsthe contribution they can make - notnurses and allied health against foreign countries. Thesewhere they come from. Migrants willprofessionals with a job offer from undermine community cohesion. contribute to the NHS - and pay inthe NHS, who have been trained before they can receive benefits. to a recognised standard, and who
> Wewill legislate to make the UKhave good working English, will be the safest place in the world to beOur new system gives us real controloffered fast-track entry, reduced online - protecting children fromover who is coming in and out. Itvisa fees and dedicated support to online abuse and harms, protectingallows us to attract the best andcome to the UK with their families.
the most vulnerable from accessingbrightest from all over the world.
harmful content, and ensuring there> Actively recruiting leaders in their is no safe space for terrorists toOnly by establishing immigrationfield to come to the UK. The small hide online - but at the same timecontrols and ending freedom ofnumber of the best technology and defending freedom of expression andmovement will we be able to attractscience graduates from the top in particular recognising and defendingthe high-skilled workers we needuniversities in the world and those the invaluable role of a free press. Also, to contribute to our economy, ourwho win top scientific prizes will be given how the online worldis moving, communities and our public services. offered fast-track entry to the UK - the Gambling Act is increasinglyThere will be fewer lower-skilledthese people can do more than any becoming an analogue law in a digitalmigrants and overall numbers will comeothers to drive scientific progress age. We will review it, with a particulardown. And we will ensure that the Britishand help our NHS and our economy.
focus on tackling issues around lootpeople are always in control.
boxes and credit card misuse.
2O_Doe, cr.
¢>:
rdGaa
IiT ia7ly:* yyI
Mv.
_: f
-_Yo
”7, aj eeeFalte
Sajid Javid7
Candidate for Bromsgrove
Chancellor of the Excheque
Ou r Au stra I ia n-> We will not allow serious criminals> Wewill treat EU and nonEU citizens einto the country. If people abuse ourequally. Regardless of whether they style points-basedhospitality, we will remove them asare from Europe or another part of quickly as possible. the world, we welcome people who systemmeet our criteria.
We will prioritise people who:> Wewill keep track of who is coming in
» Have a good grasp of Englishand out of our country.» We want EU citizens who came to live
4Hblaw-abidiiti. in the UK before Brexit to stay - and ave een ie a taing citizens In> Wewill overhaul the currentwe have committed absolutely to their own countriesae.
immigration system, and make itguaranteeing their existing rights and
» Have good education andmore fair and compassionate -ensuring that they feel a welcomed qualificationswhat happened to the Windrushand valued part of our country and generation was horrific and we willcommunity after Brexit. That is why
Most people coming into the countryensure it never happens again. Wewe introduced the EU Settlement will need a clear job offer. In addition: are committed to the WindrushScheme.
compensation scheme.
2l5! igeyLy egl bei l r } - Fy. ah
NM ieltec 2Matos Foti \.
a Sel c: aePetey eaShe Ee rs¢ iea ]hia es Piae i ityisra~~ Iar a ie J. i. aea" ‘“, fr"ASX ei a. is a:¥Ww i. ale ‘a P> Ourstudent visa will help universities a, pa i,_+h ie Afff\attract talented young people and iF; "Gg? a ae ITDsoy: allow those students to stay on to apply
7“. aif:£for work here after they graduate.
¥f5 Dayso. Ia! Ss aye Ar. oF res -yifF“-> Our startup visa, alongside our:-. kes el“I”wf tenew rules for those of exceptional
---es: - l”talent, will ensure that we can a a--a at ‘e:. Stattract the entrepreneurs of the
‘; ijiebeafuture who want to start great
SSeee ak as2" Jpre aybusinesses here in the UK.
-_a I gtF7al nSEn ‘4 ei a-;~~ e;-f:
r aeSS We want our party, and our
LYi._~ Government, to represent modern fe,; I. _ Britain - a diverse and tolerant
”; tFlcountry with confidence in its own
Soi: I __ identity and values. We believe the
-*enduring beliefs that unite us are far
- fmore important than our differences.
-J7¥Our society has been enriched by jNimmigration and we will always a6, 4recognise the contribution of those who ihave helped build our public services,
Lei businesses, culture and communities.
Ii.; ~~: TM Wewill ensure no matter where in the a:“ailworld you or your family come from,
»your rights will be respected and you will
- ~~be treated with fairness and dignity.
f)]
+ fSSFeWe will tackle prejudice, racism
Ma re Nykolyszne+. i: and discrimination and address the
7Candidate for Nottinghzyocomplex reasons why some groups do
‘~Ocean Conservailom ryFe-less well at school, earn less at work,
Piganor are more likely to be victims of
Toalcrime. We will act to improve the lives>» Wewill ensure that the historiccharges on those who come to our of all and reject the politics of division. contribution of migrant groups iscountry and use our health services
Our priority is to focus on practicalrecognised. We will maintain ourwithout contributing, doubling the solutions that make a real differencesupport for a memorial recognisingbudget for our health tourism to people’s lives. the contribution of the Windrushenforcement unit. We will continue
Generation in a prominent site into offer free emergency care to
> Wewill boost English languageLondon. anyone who needs it.
teaching to empower existing migrants and help promoteContributing to our> Inorderto help communities cope integration into society. better with pressures on public cou ntryservices, we will ensure that new GP
> Wewill back the National CitizenIt is a basic point of principle -- andand school places are delivered ahead
Service and promote it in schoolsnatural justice - that you should notof people moving into new housing as a way of bringing communitiesbe able to take out before you have putdevelopments, and will invest in together. The Youth Futuresin. Of course we should help those intechnical skills and work incentives so
Foundation will invest at leastgenuine need - especially those whoBritish workers take up as many jobs as
£9O million to improve employmenthave fled from persecution. But at thepossible.
outcomes for young people. same time, it is both right and fair that, as in other countries, people makingThis is a package of measures that is
> We will improve the qualitythe UK their home should pay into thefair, firm and compassionate - that of evidence and data withintax system for a reasonable period ofbrings the immigration system, after
Government about the types oftime before they can access welfare. so many years, into line with the British barriers different groups face, Our new immigration system will mean: people's own sense of what is right. But ensuring that fairness is at thewe cannot do any of it unless we have a heart of everything we do.» People coming into the country fromstrong Conservative Government that the EU will only be able to accesscan get Brexit done.
>» We will continue to grant asylumunemployment, housing, and child and support to refugees fleeingbenefit after five years, in the way persecution, with the ultimate aimnon-EEA migrants currently do.
of helping them to return home if it is safe to do so.>» We will no longer allow people to claim child benefit for children
> We will champion freedom ofliving overseas.
expression and tolerance, both in the UK and overseas.> Wewill require new arrivals to contribute to the funding of the
NHS and will increase the health surcharge to ensure it covers the full cost of use. We will also enforce
23ame~ 6") ae a ¥- j I we a
Zen. II meeGetting Brexit done allows us to focus on making this the best possible place to live and work
- to use our post-Brexit freedoms to build prosperity and strengthen and level up every part of the country.
Because it is not just Britain's potential that we want to unleash, but that of the British people.
Our plan means making sure peopleInvesting in people, restoring the fabric ofWe stand for the people working every have access to world-class publicour towns and cities, building the homeshour they can, those taking a risk on services, that they feel safe on thewe need, supporting science and industry, a new idea, those challenging existing streets, that working families get tostrengthening the great Union betweenthe markets. Their success is our success.
keep more of their own money, and that - United Kingdom's four nations - that is how we help with cost of living pressures. we will unleash our country’s full potential. And we stand for those who give their time to help others - the charities, community
But it also means making sure that weWe are the only party that can delivergroups and volunteers who already do so share prosperity across the country, this programme, because we are the only muchto make our country a better place.
addressing the longstanding economicparty that understands the symmetry challenges in parts of the country. Weat the heart of the UK economy. ThatWe believe, in other words, that Britain is a will invest responsibly and prudentlythe only way to fund world-class publicgreat country - the greatest place on earth.
in the infrastructure that can make aservices and outstanding infrastructureTogether, we can make it greater still.
difference, and ensure communitiesis to encourage the millions of British in every corner of the United Kingdombusinesses that create the wealth of the are pleasant, safe and prosperous. nation - especially small businesses,
And we will invest far more in helpingfamily firms and the self-employed.
workers train and retrain for the jobs and industries of the future.
25e
Revive our towns e e and cities
People across the UK are rightly proud of where they come from, and of their local areas. But too many communities feel let down. Violent crime and anti-social behaviour are ignored amid a backdrop of boardedup department stores, shops and pubs. Great towns and cities are being held back.
We as Conservatives want to give you freedom - low taxes, opportunity, the chance to realise your dreams. But we also want to give you security - safe and pleasant streets, and the ability to take pride and comfort from the community around you.
This is why, in his first months as Prime
Minister, Boris Johnson has set out an agenda for levelling up every part of the UK - not just investing in our great towns and cities, as well as rural and coastal areas, but giving them far more control of how that investment is made. In the 2lst century, we need to get away from the idea that ‘Whitehall knows best’ and that all growth must inevitably start in London. Because we as Conservatives believe you can and must trust people and communities to make the decisions that are right for them.
26To underpin this national renewal, we> Wewillinvest in the Midlandsroads. We will invest £l billion in will invest £lOO billion in additionalRail Hub, strengthening rail linkscompleting a fast-charging network infrastructure spending - on roads, including those between Birmingham, to ensure that everyone is within 3O rail and other responsible, productiveLeicester, Nottingham, Coventry, miles of a rapid electric vehicle charging investment which will repair andDerby, Hereford and Worcester. station. We will consult on the earliest refurbish the fabric of our country anddate we can phase out the sale of generate greater growth in the long>» Wewill also invest in improvingnew conventional petrol and diesel run. For example, flood defences willtrain lines to the South West andcars, while minimising the impact on receive £4 billion in new funding. East Anglia. drivers and businesses.
We will ensure that we are always>» Wewill extend contactless payas-> Wewill require that a minimum spending what we can afford -you go ticketing to almost 2OO moreservice operates during transport with strict limits on borrowing andstations in the South East, meaningstrikes. Rail workers deserve a repayment costs. that 5O per cent of all rail journeysfair deal, but it is not fair to let and almost all London commuterthe trade unions undermine the
We will use this historic investment tojourneys can be completed using alivelihoods of others.
level up and connect this country, socontactless bank card.
that everyone can get a fair share of its>» HS2is a great ambition, but future prosperity.>» Wewill give city regions the fundingwill now cost at least £8l billion to upgrade their bus, tram and trainand will not reach Leeds or
°services to make them as goodManchester until as late as 2O4O.
A transport revolutionas London's, with more frequent, We will consider the findings of
A key part of our plan to level up thebetter-integrated services, morethe Oakervee review into costs
UK’s cities and regions is to connectelectrification, modern buses andand timings and work with leaders them. Leeds is the largest city intrains and smart ticketing - such asof the Midlands and the North to
Western Europe without a light rail orthe vision proposed by Andy Streetdecide the optimal outcome.
metro system. And European citiesfor the West Midlands.
are often more productive than our>» Connectivity is not just about own in large part because they have> The railways need accountability, notthe UK’s great cities. To help better infrastructure. nationalisation. So we will end thecommunities across the country, complicated franchising model andwe will restore many of the
We will connect our cities: create a simpler, more effective railBeeching lines, reconnecting system, including giving metro mayorssmaller towns such as Fleetwood
>» Wewill build Northern Powerhousecontrol over services in their areas. and Willenhall that have suffered
Rail between Leeds and Manchesterpermanent disadvantage since and then focus on Liverpool, Tees> Wewill make a £28.8 billionthey were removed from the rail
Valley, Hull, Sheffield and Newcastle. investment in strategic and localnetwork in the l96Os.-own wo il O aes w a. at alee ile7 %F aF. i, nol PS)a! Connecting the UK is not just about,¥¥transport. We are Europe's technology
Fl7capital, producing start-ups and success
”: stories at a dazzling pace. But not everyone can share the benefits. We intend to bring full fibre and gigabitwlcapable broadband to every home and business across the UK by 2O25.
l)ss on: We know how difficult it will be, so we
’I?‘--First, have announced a raft of legislative changes to accelerate progress and
£5 billion of new public funding to
> Wewill invest in superbus networksmandatory design standardsconnect premises which are not with lower fares - flat fares infor new routes. We will extendcommercially viable.
urban areas - and increasedBikeability - cycling proficiency frequency. We will keep bus farestraining - to every child. And weSupporting local low, bring back and protect ruralwill work with the NHS to promotecommunities routes, and speed up your journeys. cycling for healthier living.
We will invest in electric buses, Local government is the bedrock of developing the UK’s first all->» Parliament has voted in principleour democracy. We are proud that electric-bus town. to support a third runway atConservative councils have led the
Heathrow, but it is a private sectorway in helping keep council taxes
>» Wewill launch the biggest everproject. It is for Heathrow tolow, providing value for money and pothole-filling programme as partdemonstrate that it can meet its airsupporting local communities.
of our National Infrastructurequality and noise obligations, that
Strategy - and our majorthe project can be financed andWe will ensure that councils continue to investment in roads will ensurebuilt and that the business case isdeliver essential local services - which is new potholes are much less likelyrealistic. The scheme will receive nowhy they received a substantial funding to appear in the future. new public money. More broadly, increase in the most recent Spending we will use new air traffic controlRound. Local people will continue to
> We will support commuter cyclingtechnology to cut the time aircrafthave the final say on council tax, being routes, so that more people canspend waiting to land, reducingable to veto excessive rises. This does cycle safely to work and moredelays, noise nuisance and pollution. not prevent councils raising more - but families can go out together. WeWe will also build on Britain’sit does ensure that they will need to have will create a new £35O millionpioneering work in electric andsolid and convincing reasons for doing so.
Cycling Infrastructure Fund withlow-carbon flight.
28We remain committed to devolvingH el ping people buy a rate re nt power to people and places across the
UK. Our ambition is for full devolution> The biggest problem that young peoplehome ownership to even more people.
across England, building on theface in getting on the housing ladderAnd we have extended the Help to successful devolution of powers tois the deposit. There are more thanBuy scheme from 2O2l to 2O23 and city region mayors, Police and Crimethree million people, many of themwill review new ways to support home
Commissioners and others, so thatwith good jobs and secure prospects, ownership following its completion.
every part of our country has thewho would have been homeowners power to shape its own destiny. We willbefore the economic crisis in 2OO8>» Wewill reform shared ownership, publish an English Devolution Whitebut have been locked out of themaking it fairer and more transparent.
Paper setting out our plans next year. mortgage market. We will encourageWe will simplify shared ownership a new market in long-term fixed rateproducts by setting a single standard
Through our City and Growth Deals wemortgages which slash the cost offor all housing associations, thereby have already delivered more thandeposits, opening up a secure path toending the confusion and disparity
£9 billion of funding across England, home ownership for first-time buyersbetween different schemes.
and almost £3 billion to Scotland, in all parts of the United Kingdom.
Wales and Northern Ireland.> Wewill continue with our reforms to
> Wewill offer more homes to localleasehold including implementing
Through bodies like the Northernfamilies, enabling councils to useour ban on the sale of new leasehold
Powerhouse, Western Gateway anddevelopers’ contributions via thehomes, restricting ground rents to a
Midlands Engine we will drive greaterplanning process to discount homespeppercorn, and providing necessary levels of foreign investment into thein perpetuity by a third for local peoplemechanisms of redress for tenants.
UK, promoting our towns, cities andwho cannot otherwise afford to buy in counties around the world. As part of ourtheir area. Councils could use this to>» Wewill bring ina Better Deal for plans for full devolution we will also inviteprioritise key workers in their area, likeRenters, including abolishing ‘no proposals from local areas for similarpolice, nurses and teachers. fault’ evictions and only requiring one growth bodies across the rest of England,‘lifetime’ deposit which moves with the such as the Oxford-Cambridge Arc.> Wewill maintain our commitment totenant. This will create a fairer rental a Right to Buy for all council tenants. market: if you're a tenant, you will be
This is an agenda which shows thatWe will also maintain the voluntaryprotected from revenge evictions the days of Whitehall knows best areRight to Buy scheme agreed withand rogue landlords, and if you're one over. We will give towns, cities andhousing associations. Following theof the many good landlords, we will communities of all sizes across the UKsuccessful voluntary pilot scheme instrengthen your rights of possession.
real power and real investment to drivethe Midlands, we will evaluate new pilot the growth of the future and unleashareas in order to spread the dream of their full potential.
29Dr James DaviesWad
Candidate for the Vale of ClwydSee ieSaad4
‘ wl ae! -ioe alld
HHof homes being built. But we mustWe will also commit to renewing
Deliver the housi ngalso rebalance the housing marketthe Affordable Homes Programme, people needtowards more home ownership -in order to support the delivery of while ensuring fairness for the newhundreds of thousands of affordable
Home ownership is one of the mostgeneration of renters. homes. This is a key part of our fundamental Conservative values. efforts to prevent people from falling
People are happier, more secure andWhile we want to encourage asinto homelessness, along with more rooted in their communitiesmany people as possible into homefully enforcing the Homelessness when they own their own home -ownership, we recognise that notReduction Act. We will also end the and know that they can pass it on toeveryone can afford their own homeblight of rough sleeping by the end future generations.- and that those in social housingof the next Parliament by expanding deserve the same dignity, respect andsuccessful pilots and programmes
For the UK to unleash its potential, fair treatment as private renters. such as the Rough Sleeping Initiative young people need the security ofand Housing First, and working to knowing that home ownership isAs Boris Johnson has promised, webring together local services to meet within their reach - that they too canwill bring forward a Social Housingthe health and housing needs of have a tangible stake in society, canWhite Paper which will set out furtherpeople sleeping on the streets.
be rooted in their communities andmeasures to empower tenants and have a place to raise a family. support the continued supply of socialWe will help pay for this by bringing homes. This will include measures toin a stamp duty surcharge on nonUK
A majority Conservative Governmentprovide greater redress, better regulationresident buyers.
will continue to increase the numberand improve the quality of social housing.
3Oee
Places we want to live in
Since 2OlO there has been a considerablegreater say on the style and design of> Environmentally friendly homes. We increase in homebuilding. We havedevelopment in their area, with localwill support the creation of new kinds delivered a million homes in the last fivecouncils encouraged to build moreof homes that have low energy bills years in England: last year, we deliveredbeautiful architecture. and which support our environmental the highest number of homes for almosttargets and will expect all new streets to
3O years.> Building safety. Following thebe lined with trees.
Grenfell tragedy there has rightly
But it still isn’t enough. That is why we willbeen a focus on building safety. No>» Homes for the Future. We will continue our progress towards our target ofreport or review can truly capture theencourage innovative design and
3OO, OOO homes a year by the mid-2O2Os. heartache, sorrow, anger and grief thattechnology to make housing more
This will see us build at least a millionmany people feel. We have alreadyaffordable, accessible, and suitable more homes, of all tenures, over the nextcommitted to implementing andfor disabled people and an ageing
Parliament - in the areas that really needlegislating for all the recommendationspopulation.
them. And we will make the planningof the Hackitt Review and the first system simpler for the public and smallphase of the independent inquiry. We>» The Green Belt. We will protect builders, and support modern methods ofwill continue to work with industry, and enhance the Green Belt. We will construction. housing associations and individuals toimprove poor quality land, increase ensure every home is safe and secure. biodiversity and make our beautiful
Crucially, however, we need to make sureAnd we will support high rise residentialcountryside more accessible for local homes are built in a way that makes senseresidents with the removal of unsafecommunity use. In order to safeguard for the people already living in the area andcladding, and continue with ourour green spaces, we will continue to for the families moving in: rigorous process of materials testing. prioritise brownfield development, particularly for the regeneration of our
> Infrastructure first. We will> Community housing and self-build. cities and towns.
amend planning rules so that theWe will support community housing infrastructure - roads, schools, GPby helping people who want to build surgeries - comes before people movetheir own homes find plots of land and into new homes. And our new £lOaccess the Help to Buy scheme. We billion Single Housing Infrastructurewill also support communities living
Fund will help deliver it faster. on council estates who want to take ownership of the land and buildings
> Beautiful, high-quality homes. Wethey live in.
will ask every community to decide on its own design standards for new development, allowing residents a
3lM ake Britain thenew companies than anywhere onworld via gigabit broadband. And our new the continent - especially in the£3 billion National Skills Fund, alongside best place totechnology sector. In areas such asother major investment in skills and sta rt a nd grow atech, financial services, law and thetraining and our reforms to high-skilled creative industries we lead the world -immigration, will ensure that businesses businessand will continue to do so after Brexit. can find and hire the workers they need.
We want Britain to be the bestOf the nearly six million businessesBut we also want to tackle the other country in the world to start andin this country, the vast majority areeveryday obstacles that they face.
grow a business - a place wheresmall and medium sized. Small and entrepreneurs know they can buildfamily businesses are the backbone> Wewill cut the burden of tax on on their ideas and find success. of the economy and Britain isbusiness by reducing business rates.
immeasurably stronger for theirThis will be done via a fundamental
Not only because businesses are goodcontribution. review of the system. As a first for society - creating the jobs thatstep, we will further reduce put bread on the table, and generatingOnce we get Brexit done, we can usebusiness rates for retail businesses, the tax revenue that funds our vitalour new freedoms to ensure thatas well as extending the discount public services. Britain’s businesses can unleash theirto grassroots music venues, small enormous potential - that they cancinemas and pubs. That means
But because we believe that weinvest, hire, export and grow, ratherprotecting your high street and should do everything we can tothan being crushed by Jeremy Corbyncommunity from excessive tax support those who want to start theirand John McDonnell’s inexorablehikes and keeping town centres own company, strike out on their own, hostility towards aspiration andvibrant.
and have an idea that grows into aentrepreneurship.
world-leading business. Our missiontk> Wewillincrease the Employment as Conservatives is to give everyoneDriving down costsAllowance for small businesses - a across the country the opportunity toand supporting smalltax cut for half a million small firms.
fulfil their potential. b° usinesses> Wewill support start-ups and
We have many strengths. We areaWe understand the challenge ofsmall businesses via government highly competitive economy withaincreasing running costs, especially forprocurement, and commit to strong education system and well-smaller firms, and are committed topaying them on time. We will also respected regulatory framework. Wereducing them. clamp down on late payment have more world-class universitiesmore broadly and strengthen than anywhere in Europe. Our plan to upgrade infrastructure willthe powers of the Small Business make it easier for businesses to operateCommissioner to support small
We are a magnet for talent, and home- to move goods about the country andbusinesses that are exploited by to more innovative and successfulto connect to customers around thetheir larger partners.
322)Donald Ekekhomen
Candidate for Croydon North
Pharmacist
_.> Wewill expand startup loans,
~which have particularly high
-’ Itakeup from women and BAME:-entrepreneurs. The British Business: I'FBank has supported 9O, OOO smaller businesses with over £7 billion
2in investment or loans, and will
7’; continue to grow.
ap\II7> Wewill help SMEs to become rdl‘sjfrexporters, so that they can seize wr" a ~the opportunities that will become
-available once we get Brexit done.
*a_>» Good regulation is essential
TRto successful businesses: we
-will strive to achieve the right alHitIregulatory balance between
Ffi:-supporting excellent business j a ore; I fl.7/fy ~~ ---practice and protecting workers,
-)ne ee )\ \'" at/, fi I Iconsumers and the environment.
MtI / IifI I ey PptThrough our Red Tape Challenge,
A\\ Ij\l}t IiCASwe will ensure that regulation is
Ait af ive] III I I;' \, sensible and proportionate, and
-if? Ij iaJ ji ‘,, that we always consider the needs ijIII Y \of small businesses when devising iffIffi if! I\new rules, using our new freedom
I / ri i II jj IITy" \after Brexit to ensure that British
I Ary il IT I Irules work for British companies.
i I Wid jify/,/
/ I, iN III I\> As well as encouraging investment i // /III I IIIIin physical building and equipment, fiii if]I\we will help employers invest iffI(fi IIin skills and look at how we can if/I\\improve the working of the
III IApprenticeship Levy.
II\
WDI(a by\ Ii\ Ii I7 he-. i >5i i 5 * ihi
~+ \‘ iir
I*4Lra " ier,. TE. Healj
‘iL7
Tthi L" I xmtiI: l]is‘]I
Backing entrepreneursincluding women and those from BAMEWe also have to recognise that some
°°backgrounds. Some of our work has beenmeasures haven't fully delivered on and innovation6suresyee spectacularly successful - such as thetheir objectives. So we will review and
Every day, people risk their savings andSeed Enterprise Investment Schemereform Entrepreneur’s Relief.
their future by becoming entrepreneurs. and Enterprise Investment Scheme,
They invent the new goods andwhich we will continue in the nextOf course, supporting enterprise services that improve our lives. FromParliament. And by cutting corporationis not just about championing decarbonisation to expanding thetax from 28 per cent to l9 per cent, webusinesses - more people than ever frontiers of artificial intelligence, have encouraged more businesses toare moving into self-employment, they are tackling some of the greatinvest and grow in the UK. especially women. We will therefore challenges of our time. We want to belaunch a review to explore how we a nation of start-ups, and of successfulSome measures have worked, butcan better support the self-employed.
scale-ups. We have more ‘unicorns’need to go further - as with R&D taxThat includes improving their access
- new billion-dollar tech companies -credits. We will increase the tax creditto finance and credit (not least than any other nation in Europe. rate to l3 per cent and review themortgages), making the tax system definition of R&D so that importanteasier to navigate, and examining how
We are proud of the work we haveinvestments in cloud computing andbetter broadband can boost homedone to support entrepreneurshipdata, which boost productivity andworking.
and want to see more entrepreneurs, innovation, are also incentivised.
34Building a fairerbusinesses who do pay their fair shareto invest and set upa business, we will
°should know that we will not permittake further action to redesign the tax taxation systemevasion to go unchecked. So we willsystem so that it boosts growth, wages
Conservatives believe in a corporateset out a new anti-tax avoidance andand investment and limits arbitrary tax tax system which rewardsevasion law. This will: advantages for the wealthiest in society.
entrepreneurship and punishes evasion. We will always be whole->» Double the maximum prison termWe are also strengthening the UK’s heartedly on the side of business, to l4 years for individuals convictedcorporate governance regime, and while making sure everyone paysof the most egregious examples ofwill reform insolvency rules and the their fair share of tax. Already, thetax fraud. audit regime so that customers and top l per cent of income taxpayerssuppliers - and UK taxpayers - are pay over 29 per cent of income tax>» Create a single, beefedup Anti-better protected when firms like
- higher than at any time under theTax Evasion unit in HMRC thatThomas Cook go into administration.
last Labour Government. covers all duties and taxes, fromWe will also carefully study the results individual errors to deliberate nonof the ongoing investigation into its
We will continue to build on thiscompliance - which is put onacollapse. We will improve incentives to tackle tax evasion and reducelegislative footing. to attack the problem of excessive opportunities for aggressive taxexecutive pay and rewards for failure.
avoidance.>» Consolidate existing anti-evasion and avoidance measures andWe will reintroduce legislation that
Since 2OlO, we have introduced morepowers. protects pension pots from being than lOO anti-avoidance measuresplundered by reckless bosses, helps and secured more than £2OO billion> Introduce a new package ofsavers be better informed with pension which would otherwise have goneanti-evasion measures, includingdashboards, and creates a new style unpaid - £24 billion in the last yearmeasures to end tax abuse inof pension scheme which is more alone. We have led the internationalthe construction sector, cracksustainable for workers and employers.
fight against aggressive tax avoidancedown on illicit tobacco packaging and offshore tax havens, rewritingand further measures to avoid global rules to ensure tax is paidprofit-shifting by multinational where profit is made. This hascompanies to avoid paying taxes.
included committing lOO jurisdictions to ending bank secrecy. Major multinational companies should pay their fair share of tax. As part of
But we can go further still. Theour approach, we will implement the gap between the amount of taxDigital Services Tax.
that should be paid and is actually collected stands at £35 billion - stillWhile always backing entrepreneurs too high. Hard-working families andthat choose to make the UK the place
35L7. } ~ -" lk* eee 9I nvest in Brita Insfurther and require significant numbers of new UK apprentices for all big new peopleinfrastructure projects - new hospitals,« new schools, major transport projects5:>
The 2O2Os will see a transformationand so on, being built with pride by a newtT.
in jobs. Automation and computinggeneration of British workers.4 will change how businesses function.\
Our plan to deliver clean energy andWhatever age you are, nothing is more4 a carbon-neutral future means newConservative than working hard to kinds of jobs in new industries. Andimprove your lot - and nothing is more our departure from the Europeanimportant for the Conservative Party
Union means we can develop forward-than supporting people in those efforts. Ga ry Hyn ds looking regulations to ensure we are first in line to develop and benefitOur reforms and investment inCandidate for Lagan Valley from the technologies of the future. education and skills mean moreAdministrative Assistant children are leaving school better
This requires a dramatic rebootingequipped for working life and there are of our training system - to supportmore high quality apprenticeships. But public services, existing businessesthere is much more to do to level upwho are keen to return to work from, and the businesses of the future. the skills of the entire nation. Not justsay, raising a family, or switch from
But above all, we want to ensureto improve Britain’s productivity, but toone career to another. It will not only that Britain’s workers have the skillsenable people to fulfil their potential. make this country more prosperous, they need to flourish - and thatbut fairer.
every citizen of this country has theAs the centrepiece of our plan, we opportunity to express their talents towill create a new National SkillsJust as universities have been the fullest. Fund worth £3 billion over the nexttransformed by significant long-term
Parliament. This fund will provideinvestment over the last few decades,
Levelling up Britain’smatching funding for individuals andwe need to make sure local colleges skillsSMEs for high-quality education andare equally excellent places for people training. A proportion will be reservedto learn. We are therefore investing
Since 2OlO, the Government hasfor further strategic investment inalmost £2 billion to upgrade the entire invested significantly in technicalskills, and we will consult widely on thefurther education college estate.
qualifications and apprenticeships, overall design. And we'll also have 2O Institutes with 3.8 million more apprenticeships. of Technology, which connect
The National Skills Fund will help tohigh-quality teaching in science,
In the next Parliament, we expect totransform the lives of people whotechnology, engineering and maths to train up hundreds of thousands morehave not got onto the work ladder andbusiness and industry.
highly skilled apprentices. But we will golack qualifications, as well as people
36a--
Lee a i} aaWorld-leading
- ~-2 "universities
7 JaThe UK is home to leading universities, b'which attract students from all over the. world, conduct vital research, and generate enormous benefits for our economy and oour society. They also do an excellent job of generating many of the skills that our economy needs, producing globally renowned scientists, entrepreneurs and creators, and enabling millions of people to fulfil their potential.
In the next Parliament we will work to maintain and strengthen our global position in higher education. The Augar
Review made thoughtful recommendations on tuition fee levels, the balance of funding between universities, further education and apprenticeships and adult learning, and we will consider them carefully. We will look at the interest rates on loan repayments with
Vitally, leaving the EU also meanscommitment to Britain’s future - toa view to reducing the burden of debt on that we can take back control of thehelping people of whatever age andstudents.
money that was being channelled viabackground navigate the new world of its Structural Funds. We have alreadywork, equip themselves with the skillsWe also will continue to explore ways to announced a UK Shared Prosperitythey need, increase their earnings andtackle the problem of grade inflation
Fund, to ensure that the people of theBritain more productive. and low quality courses, and improve
UK do not lose out from the withdrawalthe application and offer system for of EU funding (which was, of course, undergraduate students. Our approach will only a small part of the billions ofbe underpinned by a commitment to fairness, pounds we were contributing), and toquality of learning and teaching, and access.
replace the EU programme with oneAs well as making Britain the bestWewillalso strengthen academic freedom that is fairer and better tailored to ourplace to start a business, and theand free speech in universities and economy. And we will ensure thatbest place to learn and develop yourcontinue to focus on raising standards.
£5OO million of the UK Sharedskills, we want to make the UK the
Prosperity Fund is used to givebest place in the world to work. We will strengthen universities and disadvantaged people the skills theycolleges’ civic role. We will invest in local need to make a success of life. The increase in employment thatadult education and require the Office for the Conservative Government hasStudents to look at universities’ success
Taken together, this package ofoverseen since 2OlO is proof thatin increasing access across all ages, not measures represents a profoundthere is no contradiction between highjust young people entering full-time undergraduate degrees.
37I} I employment and high standards -
Iet, between dynamic growth and protecting seemployees from unfair policies and
* iladiscriminatory treatment. Over the last
I-; year, for example, unemployment has
Iifcontinued to fall, even as average real iI atiwages have increased.
IE‘F: We have raised the personal income
I Ibstax allowance, increased the minimum
Iwage and introduced and consistently
Iraised the National Living Wage to
} Iensure that people get to keep more
]"Iof what they earn and that work
Iari]always pays. And we have aimed to
}FyE. strike the right balance between the
I%heflexibility that the economy needs 'Seo’and the security that employees i:‘deserve, introducing new protections
-for workers while preserving the l rr:¥dynamism and job creation that drive
-<$<$<$<_<-our shared prosperity.
-s E*
-Once we have got Brexit done, we will eego further. Because people cannot fulfil their potential if they do not have jobs that treat them with dignity and respect, and if they are not in control of their lives and their futures.
tAs Conservatives we will always prioritise the principle of fairness in
-EBthe workplace, whether it is in the job application process, ensuring equal:° enoch-pay for equal work, or people’s working
2br Saffron WaldenIconditions. We scrapped exclusivity. Families Minister. “aclauses in zero hours contracts to give laailworkers more flexibility.
SSWe have already taken forward atherefore introduce a raft of measuresto choose between their careers and number of recommendations fromthat balance the needs of employeestheir children.
the Taylor Review and will buildand employers:
on existing employment law withOur vision for the labour market, in measures that protect those in low->» Wewill encourage flexible workingother words, is not one where the state paid work and the gig economy. Forand consult on making it the defaultdoes everything for you. It is one where example: unless employers have good reasonsthe state does everything it can to not to. help you help yourself - by upgrading
> Wewill create a single enforcementyour skills, or by being able to balance body and crack down on any>» We have reformed redundancy lawwork and family life. It is one in which a employer abusing employment law, so companies cannot discriminatedeep commitment to entrepreneurship whether by taking workers’ tips oragainst women immediately afterand business is matched by a desire to refusing them sick pay. returning from maternity leave. ensure that the jobs that are created are highly skilled, well-paid and fulfilling.
>» Wewill ensure that workers> Wewill legislate to allow parents to have the right to request a moretake extended leave for neonatalU n I eas h predictable contract and othercare, to support those new..
reasonable protections. mothers and fathers who need itinnovation during the most vulnerable and
We also want to look at more radical waysstressful days of their lives. And weThe UK has a proud record of to support working families in the UK. Ourwill look at ways to make it easierinnovation and discovery. We are the lifestyles have been transformed overfor fathers to take paternity leave. country that gave the world penicillin, the last four decades - many familiesthe World Wide Web, the theories of today have two working parents who are> We will extend the entitlementgravity and evolution, that unravelled juggling work and other responsibilities. to leave for unpaid carers, thethe structure of DNA. The University
They have to stretch themselves dailymajority of whom are women, of Cambridge alone has played host to care for children, elderly relativesto a week. to more Nobel laureates than have and those with disabilities. For women, been produced by any country in the who still tend to be the main carers inOver the last nine years, we haveworld bar the United States. More, households, this can have a big impact onextended the offer of free childcareindeed, than France, Japanand China - their careers and limit their participationhours to more working parents. Wecombined.
in the workplace. know that people value this support, but wish it could be more flexible. That spirit of discovery is still alive
But while the modern workplace isAs outlined above, we will fund morein this country today. But we have adapting as a result, we can do more ashigh-quality childcare before andnot always turned our genius for a Government to make things easier, after school and during the holidaysinnovation into jobs and companies learning from sensible approachesso that working parents do not havehere in Britain. EU regulations have adopted in other countries. We willbeen another barrier to innovation.
39We need to use science and research> In particular, we will make the UK thetechnologies of critical importance to unite and level up our country, leading global hub for life sciencesto the UK, by investing in clusters giving people opportunity and hope. after Brexit. around world-leading universities and spreading knowledge.
Once we have got Brexit done, we> Wewill use our £l billion Ayrton will turn our attention to the greatFund to develop affordable andBut it isn’t just about laboratory work.
challenges of the future such as cleanaccessible clean energy that willThe UK is at its best when it allies energy and advanced energy storage; improve lives and help us to lead theits extraordinary design and artistic a cure for dementia; and solvingworld in tackling climate change. abilities with science and technology.
antibiotic resistance. To do this we willThe Festival of Great Britain and make an unprecedented investment> Wewill use our increased R&DNorthern Ireland in 2O22 - a national in science so we can strengthenfunding from Government to attractcelebration which coincides with the research and build the foundationsand kickstart private investment. Birmingham Commonwealth Games for the new industries of tomorrow.- will encourage our leading arts and
> Wewill support internationalcultural organisations, universities,
We are committing to the fastestcollaboration and exchange andresearch institutes and businesses ever increase in domestic public R&Densure UK teams can recruit theto come together to inspire the next spending, including in basic scienceskills and talent they need fromgeneration in British innovation and research to meet our target of 2.4 perabroad. creativity.
cent of GDP being spent on R&D across the economy. Some of this new spending> Wewill reform the science fundingWe will invest in world-class will go to a new agency for high-risk, system to cut the time wasted bycomputing and health data systems high-payoff research, at arm's lengthscientists filling in forms. that can aid research, such as the from government. We will continue toground-breaking genetic sequencing support our outstanding science sector> Wewill unlock long-term capitalcarried out at the UK Biobank, as we leave the EU. in pension funds to invest in andGenomics England and the new commercialise our scientificAccelerating the Detection of Disease
Unlike Corbyn’s Labour, we will notdiscoveries, creating a vibrantproject, which has the potential to spend blindly and wastefully. science-based economy post-Brexit. transform diagnosis and treatment.
>» Wewill focus our efforts on areas>» Wewill continue to collaborateWe will use government procurement where the UK can generate ainternationally and with the EUto support new ideas and new commanding lead in the industrieson scientific research, includingcompanies. We will continue to of the future - life sciences, cleanHorizon. support charities which have helped energy, space, design, computing, to transform our public services.
robotics and artificial intelligence. These unprecedented increases to the science budget will be used to drive forward the development of
4O+kK
Annabelall
Candidate for Bath
Chartered Engineer
4z SS £& I
Py”* 46:
--7"_ * "' _P
“» o Lose * <>, 4
A ¥F ries aers DB ga
©__ i fi
--ho - +4I } ol, 7] eea, ia: r- ~, ~_ 2 <.7.; F - o:. i.. -i r/
J,::. te “yea-7daa.;
LRTI
-- /' I Zey
-"si pyI
7) iiy
Te*
Alongside investing in science, we will7 ee If. Ww maintain our support for the arts andrr 4 culture, taking pride in the worldj beating strengths of the UK’s creativeaE _Gra nt Ab raham industries and its unparalleled culturalSf esCandidate for Strangford heritage. In addition to our newrlSheep Farm Owner.
support for arts in schools, business rates relief for music venues anda. a “ofa.
cinemas, and the largest cultural caer programme in a century ~A post-Brexit deal forA post-Brexit deal for million to support local libraries°;:
and museums - we will maintainfa rmingfisheries support for creative sector tax reliefs» Once we have got Brexit done, we» Upon leaving the EU, we will leave the and free entry to the UK’s nationalwill free our farmers from theCommon Fisheries Policy, becoming museums. bureaucratic Common Agriculturalan independent coastal state and
Policy and move to a system basedtaking back control of our waters.
on ‘public money for public goods’.
Su ppo rt rura I> Wewill maintain funding for fisheries; ife a ie coasta;» To support this transition, we willacross the UK’s nations throughout guarantee the current annual budgetthe Parliament and support commu nitiesto WoL: in every year of the nextthe regeneration of our coastal
Parliament. communities.
Even as the UK forges ahead in the future, we must not forget those> Inreturn for funding, they must farm> There will be a legal commitment communities that have not sharedin a way that protects and enhancesto fish sustainably and a legal fully in the growth generated by ourour natural environment, as well asrequirement for a plan to achieve economy. safeguarding high standards of animalmaximum sustainable yield for each welfare. stock.
This Government is committed to levelling up all parts of the United» When we leave the EU, we will be able
Kingdom - and getting Brexit done willto encourage the public sector to enable us to give new support to people‘Buy British’ to support our farmers in rural and coastal communities, andand reduce environmental costs.
for our farming and fishing industries.
>» Wewill increase the annual quota for
We intend to make their lives much easier. the Seasonal Agricultural Workers
Scheme we are piloting from 2,5OO to lO, OOO.
42> Wewant to roll out gigabit broadbandAnd we want those same farmers andacross the most beautiful areas of across the country by 2O25, withfishermen to act as the stewards ofthe North a National Trail.
£5 billion in funding already promised, the natural world, preserving the UK’s and provide greater mobile coveragecountryside and oceans as they have>» We will continue to lead the world across the country. for generations. in tackling plastics pollution, both in the UK and internationally, and
> Wewill use our additional policeStewards of ourwill introduce a new levy to increase resources to tackle rural crime.°tthe proportion of recyclable plastics environmenin packaging. We will introduce
» Forareas - such as some coastalOur Environment Bill will guaranteeextended producer responsibility, towns - which have historically beenthat we will protect and restore ourso that producers pay the full poorly served in terms of educationnatural environment after leavingcosts of dealing with the waste and public services (among muchthe EU. Because conservation hasthey produce, and boost domestic else), we will cement our Opportunityalways been at the very heart ofrecycling. We will ban the export
Areas programme to raise standardsConservatism. of plastic waste to non-OECD and support regeneration. We willcountries, consulting with industry, also invest in the bus network to> Wewill set up a new independentNGOs and local councils on the improve infrequent or non-existentOffice For Environmental Protectiondate by which this should be services in the countryside, includingand introduce our own legal targets, achieved.
more ondemand services. including for air quality.
>» We will crack down on the waste
Just as in the wider economy we can>» Wewill invest in nature, helping usand carelessness that destroys combine strong employment growthto reach our Net Zero target with aour natural environment and with high employment standards, so£64O million new Nature for Climatekills marine life. We will increase we believe that British farmers andfund. Building on our support forpenalties for fly-tipping, make fishermen should be able to profitcreating a Great Northumberlandthose on community sentences by producing food and fish that areForest, we will reach an additionalclean up their parks and streets, the envy of the world - both for their75, OOO acres of trees a year by theand introduce a deposit return quality and the high standards toend of the next Parliament, as well asscheme to incentivise people to which they were produced. restoring our peatland. recycle plastic and glass.
We want people, both at home and>» We welcome the Glover Review>» We will make no changes to the abroad, to be lining up to buy British. and will create new National ParksHunting Act.
And one of the great opportunities ofand Areas of Outstanding Natural
Brexit is the chance to lead the worldBeauty, as well as making our most in the quality of our food, agricultureloved landscapes greener, happier, and land management - driven byhealthier and open to all. We will science-led, evidence-based policy. make the coast to coast path
43and strengthening the devolutionagreements is unshakeable and we
Stre ngthe nsettlements in Scotland, Wales andwill not deviate from the principle our U nionNorthern Ireland. We also want toof consent or the three-stranded ensure that the UK Government andapproach. We will continue to work with
The United Kingdom is the mostits institutions are working effectivelyall sides to reestablish the Northern successful political and economic unionto realise the benefits of four nationsIreland Executive and Assembly so in history. Together, England, Scotland, working together as one Unitedthat the people of Northern Ireland can
Wales and Northern Ireland are safer, Kingdom. We will carefully considerenjoy the full advantages of devolved stronger and more prosperous. Forthe recommendations of Lordgovernment for the benefit of the more than 3OO years, our people haveDunlop's Independent Review into UKwhole community.
built this great country together. AndGovernment Union capability when it is we believe our best days lie ahead. published as we work to strengthen our>» Guaranteeing the full economic
Union going forward. benefits of Brexit: Northern
By getting Brexit done, we will deliverIreland will enjoy the full economic certainty so that all four nationsFreeports: We will aim to ensurebenefits of Brexit including new of the UK can move on together. that our new freeports benefit thefree trade agreements with the rest
This will allow us to strengthen thepeople in each of the four nations. Weof the world. We will ensure that
Union, by making it our mission as abelieve that there are many placesNorthern Ireland’s businesses and
Government to work for the whole ofacross the United Kingdom that haveproducers enjoy unfettered access the United Kingdom, delivering for allthe opportunity to be successfulto the rest of the UK and that in the of its people wherever they live. innovative hubs for global trade. implementation of our Brexit deal, we maintain and strengthen the
I nvesting acrossSta nding up forintegrity and smooth operation of the UnionNorthern Irelandour internal market
UK Shared Prosperity Fund: The UKNorthern Ireland enjoys huge benefits> Turbocharging the Northern
Shared Prosperity Fund will be used tofrom membership of the UnitedIreland economy: After Brexit, we bind together the whole of the UnitedKingdom and our country is strongerwill support the Northern Ireland
Kingdom, tackling inequality andand richer for Northern Ireland beingExecutive to improve infrastructure, deprivation in each of our four nations. part of it. That is why we will never beenterprise and tourism, reduce
It will replace the overly bureaucraticneutral on the Union and why we standpublic sector dependence and make
EU Structural Funds - and not onlyfor a proud, confident, inclusive andthe most of our new City Deals. We be better targeted at the UK’s specificmodern unionism that affords equalintend to devolve responsibility for needs, but at a minimum match therespect to all traditions and parts ofcorporation tax and will consider the size of those funds in each nation. the community. same for short-haul Air Passenger
Duty to serve our goal of making
Strengthening the Union: ConservativesOur commitment to the l998our Union more prosperous and have a proud history of upholdingBelfast Agreement and its successorconnected than ever before.
44I
» Security and legacy issues: KeepingIIpeople safe and secure will always be]j.&. i our priority. That means taking actionI{}asf. lI.é to tackle the threat from terrorism;(ntFy--k and the scourge of paramilitarism. jJa
We will also never forget the immensela- 4 contribution of the police and Armedi“<5Fgwar
Forces in standing firm againstae. a terrorists in the past and the debt we’pre’ owe them for peace today. We will“ss erli continue to seek better ways of dealing/ll with legacy issues that provide better' outcomes for victims and survivors\ and do more to give veterans thelr7 + ee protections they deserve. yeeih,: iJ
Twelve years of SNP governmentsirat“a have led to an obsessive focus onsaan+ee independence -- all while Scotland'sRaita! ric teesidl public services and its economy haveSarena ane 34naea sa - been neglected. So long as the SNPpaca, oe i Natotalq ee ig cate Ba hema cn a are in power, Scottish schools andPt re cei se oe a wel -C4fica.
hospitals will always take secondsmile rd ee: 2 ai tk Coaight place to the pursuit of anotherLicey apa ce Seox independence referendum. r Stee Biers Piha ete:7:
We are opposed to a secondRa yatigh Peaaa Vaca Bs ok YY‘:
independence referendum and standvetaee ita Pe tl;454 with the majority of people in Scotland, ite favre ayy er MeareFiateas who do not want to return to divisioneis AT ee Eat ae; _aeae< Zh and uncertainty. Nicola Sturgeoneee wy ereher pian Koy ot uyAin tdieSa
Pe eto eae ta eee et Fy. tes hes‘aProt aaA and the SNP promised that the 2Ol4yeti! ety Set FhAtayace, ahi referendum would be a ‘once inapea a SA iy eatEATae Tenbs generation vote and the result wasaot i Reds Pa Amoreie er car. S h Oo na: Has la mre decisive. We believe that outcomePier ag na)Ca ndidate-for Lanark and Hamilton Eastihzng should be respected. ee bt Pao ediaGa leet Pi(Charity Workeray
+ StetinaF he Leans E Hain cg poe ce 4 ak os aI eioe ge eA iB ig as tl maf aa ea if ‘. f i Pac ig fiatwhe J Be Ta hef l%. i re a Bi ty Se it i ms uf a4 aOnly the Scottish Conservatives can block a Sturgeon/Corbyn alliance a\and stop a second independence
Psreferendum, so that we can get Brexit:7, TMsorted and Scotland can move on from uncertainty and division.
>» Apost-Brexit deal for Scottish é& \yfishing: As outlined above, we will leave the Common Fisheries Policy, become an independent coastal state, and take back control of our waters in December 2O2O.
a@.> Alcohol Duty Review: Scotch whisky is ee. a national export that supports 42, OOO jobs across the UK. Yet the tax on each
P: rsbottle of Scotch sold in this country
-represents almost three quarters of
4its price. That is why over the past two.3; aayears we have frozen the duty on spirits,; mgd 3cutting the price of a bottle of Scotch
3 fs aNqby 3Op. Now, we want to do more, i’ ee: f i2which is why we will review alcohol wae; F oe‘duty to ensure that our tax system is supporting British drink producers.
~. J;> Oil and gas sector deal: The oil val, fand gas industry employs almost i3OO, OOO people, of whom four in lO
¥work in Scotland. We believe that z. the North Sea oil and gas industry eo9. has a long future ahead and know
ISa ra Jonesthe sector has a key role to play as
4:°we move to a Net Zero economy.
- Candidate for Merthyr Tydfil and-RhymneyWe will support this transition
Farm Ownerin the next Parliament with a transformational sector deal. Investing in Walesa transformative Marches Growthand we believe that it has a bright
Deal, focusing on cross-borderfuture ahead. In September, we
In the 2Ol6 referendum, Wales votedinfrastructure which supports theworked to bring INEOS Automotive to Leave - yet the Welsh Labourlocal and cross-border economy. to Bridgend, which will create 5OO
Government and Plaid Cymru areThis will be modelled on thenew jobs. We will continue to back intent on overturning that decisionsuccessful collaboration betweenWelsh car manufacturing, as the by holding another referendum ongovernments and councils throughindustry transitions to building our membership of the EU. the Borderlands Growth Deal inelectric vehicles in the coming
Northern England and the South ofdecades.
Only the Welsh Conservatives canScotland - building on the work of end the current uncertainty bythe Western Gateway partnership> Welsh language: Conservatives delivering on the democratic decisionwe have already announced. are proud of Welsh language and of the Welsh people to Leave - gettingculture. We will support Welsh
Brexit done so we can unleash Wales's> Transport: To support our Union, weinstitutions such as S4C, the potential as part of the Unitedwill upgrade the A5S5 as the main roadNational Library and Museum, the
Kingdom. transport artery for North Wales -Urdd and the National Eisteddfod.
improving its capacity and resilienceWe will support the ambition for
We are ambitious for the Welshto build connections between Walesone million people in Wales to be economy and for our Union. Weand the rest of the United Kingdom. able to speak Welsh by 2O5O.
will ensure that Wales gets a fairAWelsh Conservative Government deal, with major investments inwould deliver the M4 relief road which infrastructure and industry to deliverhas been mothballed by the LabourProtect our real opportunity across the nation. administration. We gave financialdemocracy support to the Welsh Government to
After Brexit, we will continue to bebuild the relief road, yet the LabourAs Conservatives, we stand for a champion for Welsh exports andadministration decided to abandondemocracy and the rule of law. Our
Wales's presence on the global stagethose plans out of timidity. Thisindependent courts and legal system as part of a strong United Kingdom. road is a vital economic lifeline andare respected throughout the world.
its cancellation shows that Wales is
» Marches Growth Deal: Too oftencontinually being held back by theOne of the strengths of the UK's infrastructure is focused onLabour Welsh Government. We willconstitution is its ability to evolve - as national connectivity withinalso deliver on our commitment totimes have changed, so have Parliament,
England and within Wales, ratherfund the building of the West Walesgovernment and the judiciary.
than across the communitiesParkway Station outside of Swansea.
which live and work near theToday, that need is greater than ever. The border. We will work with the Welsh>» Automotive industry: Thefailure of Parliament to deliver Brexit
Government and councils on bothautomotive industry in Wales- the way so many MPs have devoted sides of the border to negotiatesustains tens of thousands of jobsthemselves to thwarting the democratic
47decision of the British people in the> Wewill make it easier for BritishOnce we get Brexit done, Britain will take
2Ol6 referendum - has opened up aexpats to vote in Parliamentaryback control of its laws. As we end the destabilising and potentially extremelyelections, and get rid of the arbitrarysupremacy of European law, we will be damaging rift between politicians andl5-year limit on their voting rights. free to craft legislation and regulations people. If the Brexit chaos continues, that maintain high standards but which with a second referendum and a second>» Wewill maintain the voting age atwork best for the UK. We want a balance
Scottish referendum too, they will losel8 - the age at which one gains fullof rights, rules and entitlements that faith even further. citizenship rights. benefits all the people and all the parts of our United Kingdom.
It is only by getting Brexit done that we>» Wewill ensure that no one is put off can start the necessary task of restoringfrom engaging in politics or standingAfter Brexit we also need to look public trust in government and politics: in an election by threats, harassmentat the broader aspects of our or abuse, whether in person or online. constitution: the relationship between
> Wewill get rid of the Fixed Termthe Government, Parliament and the
Parliaments Act - it has led to> Wewill champion freedom ofcourts; the functioning of the Royal paralysis at a time the countryexpression and tolerance, both in thePrerogative; the role of the House needed decisive action. UK and overseas. of Lords; and access to justice for ordinary people. The ability of our
>» Wewill ensure we have updated and» To support free speech, we willsecurity services to defend us against equal Parliamentary boundaries, repeal section 4O of the Crimeterrorism and organised crime is making sure that every vote counts theand Courts Act 2Ol4, which seekscritical. We will update the Human same - acornerstone of democracy. to coerce the press. We will notRights Act and administrative law to proceed with the second stage ofensure that there is a proper balance
> Wewill continue to support the Firstthe Leveson Inquiry. between the rights of individuals, our
Past the Post system of voting, as itvital national security and effective allows voters to kick out politicians>» Wewill ensure redundancy paymentsgovernment. We will ensure that who don't deliver, both locally andcan be clawed back when high-paidjudicial review is available to protect nationally. public servants move between jobs. the rights of the individuals against an overbearing state, while ensuring that
> Wewill protect the integrity of> Wewill improve the use of data, datait is not abused to conduct politics by our democracy, by introducingscience and evidence in the processanother means or to create needless identification to vote at pollingof government. delays. In our first year we will set stations, stopping postal voteup a Constitution, Democracy & harvesting and measures to preventRights Commission that will examine any foreign interference in elections. these issues in depth, and come up with proposals to restore trust in our institutions and in how our democracy operates.
48a i: I aeee, i _
“hala fi i ae, alia - fe ny % i-- meat: gee Be Bete Se ge, oaI oonFaoo aa. *i:4; 7 laitay?’ a ihi tybe tee cg_ ey ee "a:7 as - a.. r a 7 ars Fae k Me
Pe a®ee,
- A # aa --. re sae idefai
+ }f~ al aiDr Luke Evans ye" ue - aCandidate for Bosworth as I
Feaa aj-
-OP re im: f- a
+o>i)raWe Will Strength
As Conservatives, we are immensely proud of the UK's history and its standing in the world.
Unlike those currently leading the Labour Party, we view our country as a force for good.
The strength of the Armed Forces, our alliances with like-minded democracies and our willingness to act are all reasons for the UK to hold its head high.
So too is our work in promoting international development and fighting climate change - both issues on which the Conservative Party and Conservative Governments have driven the agenda forward.
And in an uncertain world, in whichthe UN Security Council; NATO; theAs we extend our diplomatic network, the threat of terrorism, rogue statesCommonwealth; Five Eyes; the G2O; the we will reinvigorate relationships with and malign non-state actors is everG7; and the World Trade Organisation. Europe and seek to strengthen old and present, it is vital that Britain standsWe will open new markets and supportnew partnerships across the world. We up and is counted. free trade and global growth. will work with our cultural institutions like the BBC and British Council to expand
Getting Brexit done will allow us to doWe will build on our fantastic trackour influence and project our values. And more on the international stage. Werecord of delivering major internationalunlike Jeremy Corbyn, we will stand up will continue to be an outward-lookingsporting events - including supportingto foreign countries that threaten the country that is a champion of collectivethe upcoming Commonwealthstability of Europe, or commit statesecurity, the rule of law, human rights, Games, UEFA European Women’ssanctioned murder on British soil.
free trade, anti-corruption efforts anda I Championships and Rugby League rules-based international system. World Cup - and we would back a potential UK and Ireland bid for the 2O3O
After Brexit, we will bolster the alliancesFIFA World Cup.
and institutions that help project our influence and keep us safe: the UN and
5l r --" "Ich{
Wy I ng‘ i. a. Fe.
Ioa2, I/¥ ¢ fI“a
Iay
L IozI' _ ~~ Darren Henryi ® {
Candidate for Broxtowe‘‘-
‘Former RAF Squadron Leader*q*
_IilA, 4*
7a2_ es
Supporting our veterans and investing in the men and women of today's Armed Forces
AConservative Government understands _ in previous armed conflicts. We also> Wewill offer wraparound childcare the sacrifices made by Armed Forcesrecognise the contribution in thefor Forces families.
personnel, veterans and their families. present day of so many from beyond these shores, such as the Gurkhas.» We have established a new Office for
That is why we will introduce newVeterans’ Affairs and we will introduce legislation to tackle the vexatious legalIn addition, we will bring in a range ofa Veterans’ Railcard.
claims that undermine our Armedmeasures to support former and current
Forces and further incorporate theService personnel.>» Wewill offer a guaranteed job
Armed Forces Covenant into law. interview for veterans for any public
>» Wewill reduce National Insurancesector role they apply for.
We will continue to acknowledgecontributions for employers if they and commemorate the invaluableemploy exService personnel.
contribution of diaspora communities
52Put our national> We will support the UK’s world-> We will stand up for the right of security fi rstclass defence industry by investingevery girl in the world to have l2 in ambitious global programmes, years of quality education.
The security of our nation comes first. including building the new Type 3l
We will protect the British people atfrigates in British shipyards such>» Wewill continue our campaigns to home and abroad, and also ensureas Rosyth and a new generation ofpromote international media freedom that the democratic rights of peoplearmoured vehicles, made in Britain. and to eradicate human trafficking in Gibraltar, the Falklands and all ourand the scourge of modern slavery.
overseas territories are protected. Pro m ote our. Wewra e will support marginalised
>» Wewill continue to exceed theval uescommunities in the developing
NATO target of spending 2 per centworld, hosting the UK government's of GDP on defence and increaseFrom helping to end the slave trade tofirst ever international LGBT the budget by at least O.5 per centtackling modern slavery, the UK hasconference. We will seek to protect above inflation every year of the newlong been a beacon of freedom andthose persecuted for their faith
Parliament. human rights - and will continue to beand implement the Truro Review so. We are proud of our peace-buildingrecommendations.
> We will modernise the equipmentand humanitarian efforts around and improve the capability of ourthe world, particularly in war-torn or> Wewill proudly maintain our world-class Armed Forces anddivided societies, and of our record incommitment to spend O.7 per cent intelligence agencies. helping to reduce global poverty. Weof GNI on development, and do will continue to support internationalmore to help countries receiving aid
> Wewill invest in training andinitiatives to achieve reconciliation, become self-sufficient.
equipping our Armed Forces, stability and justice across the world, and constantly champion theirand in current or former conflict zones> Building on this Government's exemplary contribution to oursuch as Cyprus, Sri Lanka and theexisting efforts, we will end the security and our country. Middle East, where we maintain ourpreventable deaths of mothers, support for a two-state solution. new-born babies and children
> We will maintain our Trident nuclearby 2O3O, and lead the way in deterrent, which guarantees ourOnce we leave the EU, we willeradicating Ebola and malaria.
security. champion these values even more strongly.> Wewill support the construction
> Wewill adapt to new threats, of the planned UK Holocaust investing more in cybersecurity> Wewill further develop anMemorial.
and setting up the UK’s first Spaceindependent Magnitsky-style
Command. sanctions regime to tackle human rights abusers head on.
> Wewill stand against terrorism and extremism around the world.
53w gefl
Animal Welfare
High standards of animal welfare arel one of the hallmarks of a civilisedfiee eex. Ba society. We have a long tradition of}e * Fi; ee‘i protecting animals in this country, jo_o 7 an.' often many years before others follow. fihai_-‘4 {y
Under a Conservative Government, thatAye:.;7) will continue - and we will continue toji) support such efforts overseas.\/A
> Wewill introduce tougher,, -ee sentences for animal cruelty. i\]
> Wewill crack down on the illegal Vn: j smuggling of dogs and puppies. F7 i}q
» Weill bring in new laws on animal''.
sentience.:
» Wewill end excessively longa4I journeys for slaughter and fatteningF
- one of the many benefits of leaving the European Union.
>» Wewill bring the ivory ban into force and extend it to cover other ivory-bearing species, and ban imports from trophy hunting of endangered animals.
» Wewill ban keeping primates as pets.
> Wewill bring forward cat microchipping, giving cat owners peace of mind and increasing the.
measures we have available to tackle'D) r N el I H uU d son
BaloenteineCandidate for Penrith and the Border
Veterinary Surgeon
54Fight climateworld-leading target of Net Zero> Ourworld-leading offshore wind greenhouse gas emissions by 2O5O, industry will reach 4OGW by 2O3O, cha nge andas advised by the independentand we will enable new floating wind protect theCommittee on Climate Change. farms.. We have doubled International environ mentClimate Finance. And we will use> Wewill invest £8OO million to build the our position hosting the UN Climatefirst fully deployed carbon capture
Conservation is, and always hasChange Summit in Glasgow in 2O2Ostorage cluster by the mid-2O2Os.
been, at the heart of Conservatism. to ask our global partners to match
Our Government's stewardship ofour ambition.> Wewill invest £5OO million to help the natural environment, its focusenergy-intensive industries move to on protecting the countryside and> Wewill set up new internationallow-carbon techniques.
reducing plastic waste, is a source ofpartnerships to tackle deforestation immense pride. and protect vital landscapes and>» Wewill support gas for hydrogen wildlife corridors. We will establish aproduction and nuclear energy,
But today, the climate emergencynew £5OO million Blue Planet Fund toincluding fusion, as important parts of means that the challenges we facehelp protect our oceans from plasticthe energy system, alongside increasing stretch far beyond our borders. pollution, warming sea temperaturesour commitment to renewables.
and overfishing, and extend the
Thanks to the efforts of successiveBlue Belt programme to preserve>» We placed a moratorium on fracking
Governments, the UK has cut carbonthe maritime environment. We willin England with immediate effect.
emissions by more than any similarcontinue to lead diplomatic effortsHaving listened to local communities, we developed country. We are now theto protect 3O per cent of the world’shave ruled out changes to the planning world’s leader in offshore wind - aoceans by 2O3O. system. We will not support fracking fantastic success story of Governmentunless the science shows categorically and the private sector working handOur first Budget will prioritise thethat it can be done safely.
in hand to cut costs and deliver everenvironment: investing in R&D; more electricity at plummeting costs. decarbonisation schemes; new flood>» Wewill help lower energy bills by defences, which will receive £4 billioninvesting £9.2 billion in the energy
Unlike Jeremy Corbyn, we believein new funding over the comingefficiency of homes, schools and that free markets, innovation andyears; electric vehicle infrastructurehospitals.
prosperity can protect the planet. including a national plugin network and gigafactory; and clean energy.> Wewill support clean transport to
Yet we recognise that there is far moreensure clean air, as well as setting strict that needs to be done. In the next decade, we will work withnew laws on air quality. We will consult the market to deliver two million newon the earliest date by which we can
> Wewill lead the global fight againsthigh quality jobs in clean growth. Wephase out the sale of new conventional climate change by delivering on ourhave ambitious targets: petrol and diesel cars.
55a ai
(/fbW \
Dominic Raab
Candidate for Esher and Walton
Foreign Secretary and First Secretary of StateiI ncrease tra defree trade agreements within the nextIn our trade talks, we ethree years, starting with the USA, ll and prosperityAustralia, New Zealand and Japan. ell ve Ete aie Ve HENCATS
These will be negotiated in parallelprinciples:
For the first time in nearly half a century, with our EU deal.
the UK will have its own independent» Wewill seek to provide security trade policy once we leave the EU. We will also forge stronger links withto the British people in a world the Commonwealth, which boastsof heightened trade tensions and
Free trade has been proven time andsome of the world’s most dynamictariffs.
again to be the best way to increaseeconomies such as India, with which we exports, cut prices for consumers, already share deep historical and cultural>» Wewill seek to gain market increase investment and create jobsconnections. We will use export financeaccess for British businesses and right here in the UK. We believe weto increase our businesses’ access tolower the cost of trade for them.
can use this historic opportunity toemerging markets and engage diaspora connect the UK to the world’s fastest-communities in the UK with this agenda.> Wewill drive a hard bargain with growing nations, create new exportall of our trading partners - and, opportunities and enrich ourselvesThe UK is a world leader in many areasas with all negotiations, we will be and our trading partners. such as architecture, engineering, prepared to walk away if that is in accountancy, information technology, the national interest.
As part of the EU, we were forced intodigital services, law and the creative accepting trade deals that put theirarts. Just as we led the way in opening» Wewill defend British industries priorities first. Now, we will be able toup trade in manufactured goods infrom dumping and other antitailor our trade deals to the needs ofthe last two centuries, we shouldcompetitive practices from
British firms and the British economy. open up trade in services, in which theoverseas.
majority of us work and where most
Our trade deals will not only be freenew jobs will be created.> Inall of our trade negotiations, we but fair - in particular towards thewill not compromise on our high developing nations whose economiesAs part of our commitment to makingenvironmental protection, animal could be transformed by access tothe most of the opportunities of Brexit, welfare and food standards.
the UK’s markets and expertise. Weand levelling up the nation, we will create can, for example, include provisions inup to ten freeports around the UK,>» The NHS is not on the table. The our new free trade agreements thatbenefiting some of our most deprivedprice the NHS pays for drugs is promote the fair treatment of workerscommunities. We will also redouble ournot on the table. The services and advance women’s empowerment. efforts to promote British business andthe NHS provides are not on the
UK exports and dismantle barriers totable.
Our goals for British trade aretrade and retake our seat at the World accordingly ambitious. We aim to haveTrade Organisation.
8O per cent of UK trade covered by
57pigigtyhayWe Will Put
Getting Brexit done. Investing in our public services and infrastructure. Supporting workers and families.
Strengthening the Union. Unleashing Britain's potential.
The future is there for us to grasp. We will build a Britain in which
BSl EsNot a future in which we endlesslyeveryone has the opportunity to make
3!7arefight the battles of Brexit and thethe most of their talents. We will ensure ces. ':‘Scottish independence referendum, that work will always pay. We will create tolor in which Jeremy Corbyn and Johna fair society, in which everyone always iMcDonnell - propped up by Nicolacontributes their fair share.
* 4Sturgeon - lead a Government which
“terejects everything that has made theGiven the Parliamentary arithmetic, a utUK great. vote for any other party or candidate is a aaaa vote for Jeremy Corbyn - and a vote; I I¥ 4, The Conservatives offer a future infor chaos and delay.
qi. which we get Brexit done, and then sf l:: move on to focus on our priorities -We need to end the paralysis so we ifSswhich are also your priorities. can do our job in the way you deserve.
yasThat is why we ask you to vote fora ir’Because more important than any oneConservative majority Government on
5¥Ww: commitment in this manifesto is theDecember l2th.
iespirit in which we make them. Our job
F pteis to serve you, the people. To deliveron So that together, led by Boris Johnson,
Ia f7the instruction you gave usin 2Ol6to wecan get Brexit done, and move on to: oealget Brexit done. But then to move onto unleash the full potential of this great eyhkmaking the UK an even better countrycountry.
lBaa- to investing in the NHS, our schools, faour people and our towns.; y_59i TzI
- aulih, il i
“i 4 ’E I: A /4 a t
MasItee if. a j ff >? I j* 4, ty ~~ Gs I y), it; I* i, 4y:: JaI fJ fA tIj: *sAa
\+ JHi ig agli AT ee *f i may i ]/ f rNO ‘ rite aae. lh! lU"fl
The Conservative and Unionist Party
Manifesto 2Ol9
4, Conservatives