)ee a‘ ny fl Ge
-"o. ni ge.
LanaI i sar P
REFORM
UK~~» 5 Ty
Britain se Reformé and Reform UksNeeds You© Reform UK: Our Contract with You
Our Contract with You is not just another party manifesto. It sets out the reforms that
Britain needs in the first lOO days following a general election and thereafter. It has been produced with advice from a range of independent economists, think tanks and advisors on costs and savings.
Costings can be found at the end of each policy page. Some policy areas come with net costs and others with net savings. We have also included extra growth assumptions from our economic reforms. Final annualised budget calculations across a 5 year term of government can be found at the end of this Contract.
We are impatient for change. We are doers and achievers. Our Contract with You will be delivered by people with a real track record of success.
Contents
OUP Core PICAGES tO YOU... ccesssssssssssssssssssssssssssssssassssssssesssssscsscsecsscsssssssssssssssussessecsucsssesseessesssassassassesseese 2
IMIMIQL ATION.. e.. ecessesssesssssssssessscssessscssssssssuecsesssscussssssucessssussasssscsscessssuccssssucsssesscsuccssssuceacsssssucsassasceasssseaneesseaeeses
SlaSh GOVErNMENt WASTE. uu... escsescssecseecsescstecssecssecssecsseessecsseessessssecsscsssecssesssecssscssecssecsseessessnesssessssesseesseee Ch
ECONOMY - PersOMal sssssssssssssssssssssssscsscssssesssssessssassassecsuccucsucsucsussucsscasssscassassacsaccassucsucsscsscsessscasesssesssesseses D
ECONOMY - BUSINESSccccssssssssssssessesssessesssssssssssssessssssssssssessseessssscsssssucsscessssucsasssucescssessscsasssscessssssaseessesseeses O
NOt ZOO... sessesssssscssssssesssscssenssssssssssssscesssssesssssussssssssssesssssssesesssssssesessseessssssessssesssssssesssessessesssssssssessassssseeseesseesee
POLICIING. oeesessessssssssssesssessesssssssssessusssscsscsnsssscsusssssuccnssssssseesscsucsasssussueesssaucessssuceasenscsucesssaucensssscsscsassauceasssceseesecaseesee D
JUSTICE... ec cesessesecsseecssecessscesssccssseessscesusecsnsecsnsesssecesssecsssccsseessseccsseecsseessneessseceuseessueessseesusecsaseessseessseesusessuseesneeesseeee LO)
ECUCATION. O... ceeecsssssseccsseccsseccnseecsscccsteccssecsssecsuseesssecsuscesusecsusecsusecsusessueesssecesseecsseessseecsseesssesssseesssesssessseesssteeseeeee TI
BON eFitS oe ceescseescsseecsseccsseecnscecsscccsseccsseesssecsuseesusecsuseesusecsuseesssecsusessusessuecessescsueeesusecsueecsseessneesssecessesenseesnseesneesee 2
BY@Xit o... cesssesscsssecsseecssscesseccsseecnseccsscccsseccssecsssecsusecsuseceusessuseessseesssecsusessusessnecesseessueeesusecsucecsseecsneessseeessesenseesnseesseees lD
DO TONE... ecseesssssssessseesssessecssecsesssessscsssscssesssecssecssecstecssecssecssecssecsuecssessuesaseesnecsscesseessasssesssesssesscecssecssesseasssesseees lG
HOUSIINQ... ecsssssssssesssssssssessscssesssssnssssssscesscsscsnecsscsucenecsscsnsssscsusesscsucsnecsscsucescsucsnsssscsnsesecsucsssesecsnessecsssesesssssssessesesee LD
CHIEN AN, FAM... essssescssseccseeccseecsseecsseccsseccsseecssecesseccsseecsseessseessseccuseecsscecsseesusecsssessseeesseeeseeeesees lO
TrANSPOFt ANC INFFASTFUCTULE ou... esssssssssscsesssssssssssssssssssssssssscscsecsesssessssesssssssssssssessssessessssssessssssasssees LZ,
AQTICUITULE wo. cesescsssssssessssssecscsnssssssscssscsscsnsssscsnsenscsscsnscsscsnsesscsucanscsscansessssucenccsscsusssscsucssesssssssssesscssesssssssssesssesse TO
FISNETICSssesssseccsseccnscecsseecsseccssecsusecsnscesssecsnseessscesusccsusecsusesssecssseccuseecusecssseesssecsssessuseesssessnseesseessseesetecseeessneesee lD)
PeNsiONS ANC SOCIal CALE... essessssescssescsseecsseecsueecsscecsseccsseccnseecsseessteesssecsasessuseessseessseesnseessseesetecseeessneess LO)
CONSTITUTIONAL REFOIT a... esssesssssscsssscsetecsnsecssecessecenscecsseecsseessseccsseesssecsuscesssessuseesusecsssecsetecsesessuecesseessseeesees ZI
ReEClAIMING Britain... csessessssssssssessesssssssssessssssesscsssssessssssesscssssssssussnsssscssssssssesssessscsscsssssssssesssssssssesssees DD
FUNCING OUP PLANS eeesssesssssessssssecssessessssssessecsscssessscsucsscssscsucsssssussscssscsucsssssscsssssscsscssessucssssssessesssessess DO7O&
REFORM UK2O%OOsom) ) Reform UK: Our Contract with You
Fourteen years of Tory failure are coming to an end. A Labour government would ramp up mass immigration, crime, and taxes even further. Labour and the Tories are two sides of the same coin.
Only Reform UK is ready to stand up for common sense politics. We set out our plan in this document, Our Contract with You. Wherever you look, Britain needs Reform.
Our Contract with You covers the most important areas of policy for you and your family, but we have summarised these into five core pledges:
l. Imagine Smart Immigration, Not Mass Immigration
All non-essential immigration frozen to boost wages, protect public services, end the housing crisis and cut crime.
2. Imagine No More Small Boats in the Channel
Illegal migrants who come to the UK will be detained and deported. And if needed, migrants in small boats will be picked up and taken back to France.
3. Imagine No NHS Waiting Lists
Still free at the point of delivery, healthcare needs reform to improve outcomes and enjoy zero NHS waiting lists. Cut back office waste to spend more money on the frontline. Tax breaks for doctors and nurses to tackle the staffing crisis.
4. Imagine Good Wages for a Hard Day’s Work
Lift the income tax starting threshold to £2Ok to save the lowest paid £l,5OO per year. This takes 7 million of the least well-off out of Income Tax to make work pay and get people off benefits.
5. Imagine Affordable, Stable Energy Bills
Scrap energy levies and Net Zero to slash energy bills and save each household
£5OO per year. Unlock Britain’s vast oil and gas reserves to beat the cost of living crisis and unleash real economic growth.
This is what
Reform UK MPs will fight hard for if elected.
So if you want change, vote for it on July 4th.
Vote Reform UK to get reform. Reform UK: Our Contract with You
“Securing.. boost your wages
Uncontrolled Immigration and protect public
°°services and has Pushed Britain toBritish culture
Breaking Pointanarvamues." Reform UK will secure Britain’sImmediate Deportation for Foreign Criminals borders to protect wages, ourDeport foreign nationals immediately after their public services, and BritishPrison sentence ends. withdraw citizenship from culture and valuesimmigrants who commit crime with the exception
°of some misdemeanour offences.
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THEBar Student Dependents
FIRST lOO DAYS: Introduce new visa rules for international students... that bar dependents. Only international students
Freeze Non-Essential Immigration,;;.
ae;;; with essential skills can remain in the UK. Close
Strict limits on immigration are the only way to;;; down fake courses and immigration schemes that relieve the pressure on our housing, public services,,.. abuse the rules.
increase wages and protect our culture, identity and values. Essential skills, mainly around healthcare, Stop Health Tourism and Immediate Access to must be the only exception. Benefits
Stop the Boats with our 4 Point PlanWe will impose a requirement of S years residency
Leave the European Convention on Human Rights. and employment to claim any benefits in the UK.
Zero illegal immigrants to be resettled in the UK. Employer Immigration Tax
New Department of Immigration. Pick up illegalThe National Insurance rate will be raised to 2O% for migrants out of boats and take them back to France. foreign workers. This would incentivise businesses
Secure Detention for all Illegal Migrantsto employ British citizens whose National Insurance
All asylum seekers that arrive illegally from saferate would stay at l3.8%. Essential foreign health countries will be processed rapidly, offshore ifand care workers would be exempt from the tax, necessary. Those entering from a safe country willas would businesses who employ 5 staff members also be barred from claiming asylum or citizenship. and under. This would boost wages and could raise
No legal aid for non-citizens. Those rejected willmore than £2O billion over five years to pay for be returned. apprenticeships and training for young Brits.
amy OEYi a; Hy: ip std Py
‘Rh a\\i-;
- -Suedl~IMMIGRATION PLEDGES SAVINGS-
--SSae e Ct Renee ki£5lO BILLION PA eSSSEMPLOYER IMMIGRATION TAX ane ee ee ae Le ee>Reform UK: Our Contract with You
SLASH GOVERNMENT WASTE
Government Spending Needs
Major Reform
Reform UK will slash wastefulbetter value procurement without touching spending to increase fundingfrontline services. This will save £5O billion per year, f99ensure tax cuts and boost our economy.
for frontline public services and reduce taxes for working people. Brexit Bonus. Cut Unnecessary Regulations
Britain still retains over 6'7OO EU laws. Government red tape and nanny state regulations are estimated
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THEto have cost the UK economy £l43 billion since 2Ol5.
FIRST lOO DAYS: That means £ billions lost in growth and taxes.
Bank of England Must Stop Paying Interest toCut Foreign Aid by 5O%
Commercial Banks on QE ReservesSave £6 billion from the £l2.8 billion budget. A
This approach would save around £55 billion permajor review is needed into the effectiveness of year and has been endorsed by senior figures atthe -- Qverseas aid. That includes global quangos to which
Financial Times, New Economics Foundation, andwe pay over £7 billion every year.
IFS, as well as two former Deputy Governors of the
Bank of England. Collect £ Billions in Unpaid Tax
HM Revenue and Customs failed to collect tens of
Save £5 in every £lOObillions in taxes last year due to understaffing and
Every department must slash wasteful spending, bad management. Improved HMRC competence cut bureaucracy, improve efficiency and negotiatewould deliver lower taxes to British workers.
“Reform UKfi Ges will make surewr‘ taxpayers’I4 money is never.
wasted.”. ea alia malaise. som aSLASH GOVERNMENT WASTE:
SaPOTENTIAL SAVINGS £9l BILLION PAReform UK: Our Contract with You
ECONOMY - PERSONAL
Reform UK will make work payCut Residential Stamp Duty and help the unemployed toSubstantially boost economic activity and
°housebuilding by cutting Stamp Duty to O% below hnefits trap.
SEELTIS NS benerits t ap£75Ok. Cut it to 2% from £75Ok - £l.5m and cut it to
4% over £l.5m.
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THE..
FIRST lOO DAYS: Abolish the VAT Tourist Tax. The government has cost our economy over £lO
Make Work Pay. Lift the Income Tax Startbilllon when they stopped the VAT refund scheme
Point to £2O, OOO Per Yearfor tourist shopping. This also deterred up to 2
This frees up to 7 million people from payingmillion tourists,
Income Tax and saves every worker almost £l,5OO per year. Basic Tax rate stays at 2O%. The higherAbolish Inheritance Tax (IHT) for all Estates rate should begin at £7O, OOO. Under £2m.. That means some 98% of all estates. The rate above
Cut Energy Taxes, Beat the Costof-Living£2m will be 2O% tax, with the option to donate to
Crisischarity instead.
Save households over £5OO per year. Lower fuel duty by 2Op per litre for both residential and business users. Scrap VAT on energy bills. Scrap environmental levies.
“Reform UK will take 7 million people out of. Income Tax.” all
-es
» I“4\ "y
ON;
ECONOMY - PERSONAL PLEDGES
COSTS £7O BILLION PAReform UK: Our Contract with You
ECONOMY - BUSINESS
Reform UK will back risk takersThereafter:
and wealth creators and makeSupport Small and Medium Sized Enterprises sure that Britain is open for(SMEs) businessAbolish Business Rates for high street based SMEs.
°Offset this with Online Delivery Tax at 4% for large, multinational enterprises to create a fairer playing
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THEfield for high streets. Cut entrepreneurs’ tax to 5%.
FIRST lOO DAYS:.
a.. Reform the Planning System
Free Over l.2 Million Small and Medium SizedFast-track new housing on brownfield sites
Businesses from Corporation Taxand infrastructure projects to boost businesses,
Lift the minimum profit threshold to £lOOk. Reduceespecially in coastal regeneration areas, Wales, the
]j(e)ie) the main Corporation Tax Rate from 25% to 2O%, North, and the Midlands.
then to l5% from Year 3.. Slash Red Tape to Boost Industry and Exports
Abolish IR35 Rules to Support Sole TradersScrap thousands of laws that hold back British
Britain's self-employed often work longer hours andbusiness and damage productivity, including take more risks. Many have no pension and receiveemployment laws. We must make it easier to hire no sick pay. and fire so that businesses can grow.
Lift the VAT Threshold to £l5O, OOOReform the Tax System
Free up small entrepreneurs from red tape. Major simplification is needed. At over 2l, OOO pages, the Uk’s tax code is a burden. Hong Kong's tax code is under 5OO pages.
“Reform UK eeee will back risk AN takers and. eS wealthsop cd creators.”. CSi
*y, ‘
ECONOMY - BUSINESS PLEDGES
COSTS £l8 BILLION PA,
REFORM UK 2O24INY. "6
AlReform UK: Our Contract with You
NHS
Despite record extra funding inThereafter:
recent years, NHS healthcarePut Patients in Charge With a New NHS outcomes have declined. WhileVoucher Scheme still free at the point of delivery, NHS Patients will receive a voucher for private our healthcare needs majortreatment if they can't see a GP within 3 days.
reforms to improve results andFor a consultant it would be 3 weeks. For an enjoy zero Waiting lists. operation, 9 weeks. Services will always be free at the point of use.
Improve Efficiency. Cut Waste and
Unnecessary Managers
FIRST lOO DAYS:
Operating theatres must be open on weekends.
End Doctor and Nurse ShortagesRotas must be planned further in advance. Nail
All frontline NHS and social care staff to pay zerodown better prices using economies of scale.
basic rate tax for 3 years. This will help retain existingReview all NHS Private Finance Contracts for staff and attract many who have left to return. Endsignificant savings potential. Charge those who fail training caps for all UK medical students. Write offto attend medical appointments without notice.
student fees pro rata per year over lO years of NHSAbolish the NHS Race and Health Observatory.
service for all doctors, nurses and medical staff. Save A&E
Use Independent Healthcare CapacityCut waiting times with a campaign of ‘Pharmacy
We will harness independent and not-for-profitFirst, GP Second, A&E Last’. We will offer tax health provision in the UK and overseas. incentives for new pharmacies and those who
Tax Relief of 2O% on all Private Healthcareemploy more staff to assist in relieving pressure and Insuranceon A&E.
This will improve care for all by relieving pressureExcess Deaths and Vaccine Harms onthe NHS. Those who rely on the NHS will enjoyPublic Inquiry faster, better care. Independent healthcare capacityExcess deaths are nearly as high as they were will grow rapidly, providing competition andduring the Covid pandemic. Young people are reducing costs. over-represented.
“Patients first.,
Rapid care. a7a
Cutting waste -> an NHS to beq proud ofY again.”, gi
NHS PLEDGES COSTSiz
£l7 BILLION PA' REFORM UK 2O24}_.7Reform UK: Our Contract with You
NET ZERO
Net Zero is Crippling our Economy
Net Zero is pushing up bills, Scrap Annual £lO Billion of Renewable Energy damaging British industries likeSubsidies steel, and making us less secure. Achieve this through equivalent taxes on them.
We can protect our environmentRenewables are not cheaper. Our bills have with more tree planting moreincreased dramatically in line with the huge increase recycling and less sineils usein renewables capacity over the last l5 years.
plastics. New technologyCheap, Secure Energy for Britain will help, but we must notStart fast-track licences of North Sea gas and oil.
impoverish ourselves in pursuitGrant shale gas licences on test sites for 2 years.
of unaffordable, unachievableEnable major production when safety is proven,?:.
with local compensation schemes.
global CO2 targets.
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THECleaner Energy from New Technology
FIRST lOO DAYS: Fast-track clean nuclear energy with new Small
Scrap Net Zero and Related SubsidiesModular Reactors, built in Britain. Increase and
Pincentivise ethical UK lithium mining for electric
Ditching Net Zero could save the public sector overbatteries, combined cycle gas turbines, clean
£3O billion per year for the next 25 years. synthetic fuel, tidal power and explore clean coal mining.
“Reform UK will scrap Net
Zero to cut bills and restore egrowth.”
NET ZERO PLEDGES
SAVINGS £3O BILLION PA
REFORM UK 2O248Reform UK: Our Contract with You
POLICING
Reform UK will restore Law andpresentation for front line officers. Sack Chief
Order on Britain’s streets andConstables that allow two-tier policing.
make sure that criminals faceMore Bobbies on the Beat justice. Ensure that police return to the beat and use better technology and stop wasting time on paperwork.
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THEAllow PCSOs to become police officers before the
FIRST lOO DAYS: role is phased out.
es‘’ss
Commence Increase in Police NumbersCommon Sense Policing not ‘Woke’ Policing
Recruitment to increase UK per capita policeScrap all Diversity, Equality and Inclusion (DE&I) numbers to 3OO per lOOk population. That is 4O, OOOroles and regulations to stop two-tler policing.
new front-line officers, over a 5year parliament. Overhaul the Independent Office of Police Conduct
_.(lLOPC) so that the police complaints system
Commence Zero Tolerance Policingbecomes more accountable and works for the lawClampdown on all crime and antisocial behaviour. abiding public.
Increase Stop and Search substantially. Thereafter:
Prison for violent crimes and possessing a knife. DePoliticise the College of Policing
Drug dealing and trafficking will get mandatoryaoe life imprisonment. A new offence of SubstantialPrioritise crime prevention, discipline, public service... and high standards of strength and fitness among
Possession of Drugs will meet heavy fines.... trainees. Replace degree-standard entry with
New Police Leadership and Recruitmentan entrance exam. Require officers to complete
Regimea 2year probationary period. Stricter entry
Strong preference for exmilitary officers andrequirements.
personnel. High standards of fitness and
> a~e
I “Zero tolerance policing. More,'police, higher standards”
‘ pee: POLICING PLEDGES COSTS(ie I a. em£3 BILLION PA
2O24q. an» >Reform UK: Our Contract with You
JUSTICE
Our Justice System Needs Reform
Reform UK will buildaStart Building of lO, OOO New Detention Places common sense justice systemStart expansion in capacity of state built and that punishes criminals andmanaged prisons so that life means life for those keeps the public safe. who endanger the public. Commission disused military bases if needed.
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THEThereafter:
FIRST lOO DAYS: Reform the Child Maintenance Service
Urgent Sentencing Review with AutomaticWe will launch a special division of the Family
Life Imprisonment for Violent RepeatCourt for maintenance and defaults. Share parental
Offenderscare 5O/5O where appropriate. Rights of access for
Those committing second violent or serious offencesgrandparents.
will receive mandatory life sentences. Stop Child Grooming Gangs
Increase the Criminal Justice BudgetDeport offenders holding dual citizenship. Make
The budget is almost the same as it was lO yearschild grooming an aggravating offence. Improve ago. Increase it from £lO billion to £l2 billion tosafeguarding of victims and vulnerable. No bail for ensure more high calibre staff to cut delays. Reopengrooming gang offenders.
local magistrates’ courts to clear the case backlog. Tackle Youth Crime
Change the Definition of Hate CrimeReopen High Intensity Training Camps for young
The CPS and police definition of a hate crime hasoffenders to teach basic education, led to systemic bias. Members of the British publicteamwork and values.
must not be investigated because ‘any’ person
‘perceives’ that a hate crime has been committed.
rA OP}-_“Reform UK
7%3zawill make sure: TM”bythat criminalsey
A--face justice.” lbad., a. y; 5.{ a II. ta
+IDt TM. JUSTICE PLEDGES COSTS
Ilp£2 BILLION PA
Retean
NREFORM UK 2O24oglOReform UK: Our Contract with You
EDUCATION
Too Many Children and Young People are Being Badly Let Down
Reform UK wants an educationindependent schools. This will significantly ease system that ensures youngpressure on state schools and improve education oe. efor all.
people are proud of Britain andore learn the skills, character andScrap Interest on Student Loans values to succeed in life. Extend loan capital repayment periods to 45 years.
Restrict undergraduate numbers well below
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THEcurrent levels, too many courses are not good
FIRST lOO DAYS: enough and students are being ripped off. Enforce minimum entry standards.
A Patriotic Curriculum in Primary andy
Secondary SchoolsThereafter:
Any teaching about a period or example of BritishCut Funding to Universities that Undermine or European imperialism or slavery must be pairedFree Speech with the teaching of a non-European OCCUTTENCEThe government's Free Speech Act is toothless.
of the same to ensure balance. History and socialAllowing political bias or cancel culture must face science curriculum to be reviewed and auditedheavy financial penalties.
ean’ one re pene Our children must bePermanent Exclusions for Violent and taught about their heritage. Disruptive Students
Ban Transgender Ideology in Primary and
Secondar oe choolsoyyWe will double the number of Pupil Referral Units y(PRUs) so schools can function safely. We will also
No gender questioning, social transitioning orensure that best practice is spread across PRUs.
pronoun swapping. Inform parents of under l6s. e.
about their children’s life decisions. Schools mustUniversities Must Provide 2Year have single sex facilities. Undergraduate Courses
Tax relief of 2O% on all Independent EducationThe option of 2year courses would reduce student debt and allow earlier entry into employment to
No VAT on Fees. If parents can afford to pay a.;_. help pay it off.
bit more, we should incentivise them to choose
°Fy-“EducationI o/ /I ’‘Sthat nurtures ba/Pskills, character I "iVagand values -7
\Mynot a divided;
IZA eassociety.” aesoe i; a7
“SU%4
~~ f,( »a\
\\ \/IN>EDUCATION PLEDGES aw)\<COSTS £5 BILLION PA
“IIReform UK: Our Contract with You
BENEFITS
The Benefits System is Broken
Reform UK will ensure thoseEnforce a 2Strike Rule for Job Offers who can work do work. All job seekers and those fit to work must find employment within 4 months or accept a job after
FIRST lOO DAYS: Face to Face, Not Remote Assessments
Make Work Payfor Benefits
Lifting the Income Tax start point to £2O, OOO perPersonal Independence Payment and Work year means an extra £l,5OO per year. This would be aCa pabllity Assessment should be face to face.
key incentive for those on benefits to find work. We will require independent medical assessments._to prove eligibility for payments. Those registered
Motivate up to 2 million People Back to Workwith severe disabilities or serious long-term illnesses
Reforms to benefit support and training will helpwould be exempt from regular checks.
people back into work. Particular focus on l634 year olds. Employment is critical to improving mental health. Tax relief for businesses that undertake apprenticeships.
“In Britain, if you canwork, you must~ ClleS work.”I ~’.
©aa:.. Teadi:... ~°-_--e7ry I ~ -
~ ’s.--- x. f
\*VeyMae) aa)Iaf;/
BENEFITS PLEDGES
&SAVINGS £l5 BILLION PA
REFORM UK 2O24l2Reform UK: Our Contract with You
BREXIT
Brexit Means Taking Back Control of our Borders, Money and Laws
Reform UK will do what theIrish Sea. Northern Ireland is still in the EU's single
Tories have failed to - grasp themarket for goods. It is unacceptable that British hosfB°citizens in Northern Ireland are being ruled by uge opportunities of BrexitEU laws.
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THEos
FIRST lOO DAYS: Independence for Britain’s Armed Forces isllatiithThe government has signed up to the EU Horizon
Legis ate to Scrap EU Regulations witprogramme. That means we send money to the
Immediate EffectEuropean Defence Fund and part of the EU's
Britain still has over 6,7OO retained EU laws, military mobility project. Our Armed Forces are which we will rescind. British laws on State Aid, at risk of being sucked into an EU Command and
Competition, Employment, Net Zero and theControl Force.
Environment are still based on EU regulations. Prepare for Renegotiations on the EU Trade
Abandon the Windsor Frameworkand Cooperation Agreement
This is worse than the original Northern IrelandA socalled EU ‘level playing field! is holding us back.
Protocol. The UK has been partitioned down the
YY“Reform UK will
A vmTM unlock the major
G4opportunities
“Sof Brexit.”
&I i 'Ja
Ies
IDaesom) ) Reform UK: Our Contract with You
DEFENCE
Reform UK will ensure ourNew, Dedicated Ministerial Department for servicemen and women have theVeterans resources they need to defendA properly funded and resourced whole our nation and that they aredepartment is essential to guarantee no veteran respected and supported aftergoes without and that our former servicemen thth°and women play a leading role in our society and ey leave tne services. economy.
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THE.
FIRST lOO DAYS: Recruit 3O, OOO for the army
Increase Defence Spending to 2.5% of NationalMilitary national service for 3O, OOO young people
GDP b3. th i” vehi 6 °for one year is not the answer. We need to recruit y year @ then 27 within 's years43O, OOO to join the army full time
This -, eee size and. _ of NATORegenerate Britain’s Defence Manufacturing armed forces and ensure our lead role in, and Technology
It will also improve equipment, quality of life for services personnel and boost morale in militaryIntroduce incentives and tax breaks to boost the communitiesUK defence industry. Improve equipment selfdPay Revisufficiency and manufacture world class products ntroduce Urgent Pay Reviewfor export.
Increase basic pay across our armed forces to boostReform Defence Procurement recruitment and retention. It is unacceptable that aa private soldier is paid less than an Amazon worker. Launch a Joint Acquisition Corp to ensure world.. class procurement. The Ministry of Defence must
Introduce new Armed Forces Justice Billlisten to soldiers on the front line and ensure they
Protect our servicemen and women on active dutyget the equipment they need.
inside and outside the UK from civil law and humanEducation for Military Personnel rights lawyers. The bill will also create an armed forces watchdog to fast-track complaints andFree education both during and after service is vital appeals in housing and welfare. to ensure a successful return to civilian life.
“Reform UK¥“o will strengthenour armed forcescd.
and empower our veterans.” (~~ee: oeDEFENCE PLEDGES,#COSTS £l4 BILLION PA
REFORM UK 2O24l4Reform UK: Our Contract with You
HOUSING
Britain has a Housing Crisis
Reform UK will ensure thatrestore landlords’ rights to deduct finance costs and people can own their own homemortgage interest from tax on rental income.
by unleashing housebuildingAbolish the Renters’ (Reform) Bill across the country and cuttingExisting legislation was inadequate to address bad immigration. practices. Instead, we will boost the monitoring, appeals and enforcement process for renters with
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THEgrievances.
FIRST lOO DAYS: Thereafter:
Review the Planning SystemProtection for Leaseholders
Fast-track planning and tax incentives forAll potential charges for leasehold or freehold development of brownfield sites. ‘Loose fit planning’residents must be clearly stated and consented policy for large residential developments with preto. Enforce Section lO6 agreements. Ensure it is approved guidelines and developer requirements. cheaper and easier to extend leases to 99O years
Reform Social Housing Lawand buy freeholds.
Prioritise local people and those who have paid intoIncentivise Use of New Construction the system. Foreign nationals must go to the backTechnology of the queue. Not the front. We will incentivise innovation to speed up building:
Scrap section 24 for Landlordsmodular construction, digital technology and
The tax system should encourage smaller landlordsbuilding sites that improve efficiency and cut waste.
into the rental markets. Not penalise them. We will ae Sa hy,’ ‘ ee Moh es, ihe es &os‘3
5ey2s“7It ieee a
“Affordable We.) 22k (Pe ee Oe
4homesfor {4% ae Seite perce a
Mm hard-workingNS eget tt ta oa I Halbert I ttl
Bhe, eY So O2 stall Syelek I, ne a 5 Na fitsos ey aaaBritisha a 2Chee eae ue nadaugs a au Ss
Reo¥Dill Wee 3 taicc - SCE * hes arpieepasg. Se al:: a
HOUSING PLEDGES
~-COSTS £ NEUTRAL5
REFORM UK 2O24»-_: a a eSReform UK: Our Contract with You
“Puttin
CHILDREN AND FAMILIESutting families first.
e@e@e e
Britain has one of theBritain's future
°°depends on
Highest Family Breakdown our young
°people.”
Rates in the Western World
Reform UK believes that strongBenefit system for children aged l4 would give families are the bedrock ofaparents the choice to spend more time with thriving society - we willsupport - "" children.
family formation and giveMandate Single Sex Spaces parents back control. Public toilets and changing areas must provide single sex facilities.
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THEPromote Child Friendly App Restricted
Support Marriage Through the Tax SystemSocial media is associated with eating disorders,
As soon as finances allow, introduce a UK 25%anxiety, depression, suicide and the child mental transferable marriage tax allowance. This wouldhealth crisis. Launch an inquiry into social media mean no tax on the first £25, OOO of income forharms.
either spouse. This will help make work pay and incentivise people trapped on benefits back into the Thereafter:
workplace. Review the Online Safety Bill
Choice for Stayat-Home Mums or DadsSocial media giants that push baseless transgender
The majority of mothers would choose to stay atideology and divisive Critical Race theory should home more if they could. Front-loading the Childhave no role in regulating free speech.
I”.
AtA
I}4{i V4
CHILDREN & FAMILIES PLEDGES
COSTS £8 BILLION PA
REFORM UK 2O24l6Reform UK: Our Contract with You
TRANSPORT & UTILITIES INFRASTRUCTURE
The Scandal of our Crumbling
Reform UK will take a pragmaticAccelerate Transport Infrastructure approach to getting Britain’sFocus on our coastal regions, Wales, the North, and infrastructure back on its feetthe Midlands. Improve existing rail and road links.
and keeping it secure fromIntegrated services are critical.
foreign threats. Thereafter:
Tighter Regulation and New Ownership Model for Critical National Infrastructure
FIRST lOO DAYS: The British taxpayer needs to be in control of: Britain's utilities. Launch a new model that
Scrap HS2brings 5O% of each utility into public ownership.
Save £25 billion by scrapping the rest of this bloatedThe other 5O% would be owned by UK pension.. funds, benefiting from new expertise and better vanity project.
management. We will ensure standing charges are
Stop the War on Driverscapped to help low users and pensioners.
Legislate to ban ULEZ Clean Air Zones and LowA Single Government Infrastructure Funding
Traffic Neighbourhoods. Scrapping Net Zero meansStream no more bans on petrol and diesel cars and no legal ~- Overhaul and merge the National Infrastructure requirements for manufacturers to sell electric cars. Commission and the Infrastructure Bank. Scrap Net
We will keep the speed limit low where safety isZero objectives. Simplify the funding process to save critical. Otherwise, 2O MPH zones will be scrapped. time, cut waste, boost funding and accountability.? aII SeSS aw: Cl A Ne NN
SOB iy Si x SSE Ss SS SS es S'S a ee pS SSSI Ss SS SS wae y tag¥ 7s mB & raz Ke \ rmaisj i ie. al:,: ILe: a s
Le \y_ ih Te ai> I; aie wee] I
Wy “ReformUK \ea-‘«4pi eo has the vision (~ te.2 EL
Ito transformafee Ae p; e e ’“nm --- oo+
))- Britain’s brokenSg
See infrastructure.” ga
SSTRANSPORT AND UTILITIES eesINFRASTRUCTURE PLEDGES
SAVINGS £25 BILLION ONE-OFF
£5 BILLION PER YEAR
OVER FIRST 5 YEARS
REFORM UK 2O24Swe Tae. l7Reform UK: Our Contract with You
AGRICULTURE
British Farming Needs Reform to
Take Advantage of Brexit
Reform UK will revitalise Britain’sof our environment. They boost rural jobs, agriculture to give a much-communities and local economies.
needed boost to our farmersThereafter:
and guarantee the country’sStop Supermarket Price Fixing food security. Grant powers to the Competitions and Markets
Authority to ensure fair pricing. Help farmers
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THEsell their produce directly to the public. Change
FIRST lOO DAYS: planning laws to support farm shops with zero
Increase the Farming Budget to £3 Billionbusiness rates.
Focus on smaller farms. Keep farmland in use. BringBuy British. Buy Quality young people into farming. Boost rural ECONOMYTarget 7O% to ensure food security. Taxpayer funded and culture. Increase innovation and diversification. organisations should source 75% of their food from
Help farmers to farm, not pay them to leave or retire. the UK. Clear labelling for consumer choice. Boost
Scrap Climate-Related Farming Subsidiessmaller food processors and abattoirs through tax
Productive land must be farmed, not be used forbreaks and other incentives.
solar farms or rewilding. Replace current subsidiesFarming not Form Filling ae cog, Dayments step Nerara Engiane fromMany farmers spend over l5 hours a week on ggpaperwork. Cut red tape from HMRC and the
Protect Country SportsBritish Cattle Movement Service.
These increase investment and help conservation
“Reform UKeo ae wa, I a uae Loe ey een
°enerMT IndeO SS re
~. agriculture back IToll I Ree
J on its feet.”cnc HS eg nak Seam 2 ESIGN ne cere
/\/4. REFORM UK 2O24NY \- Fi is a Set ava ON IESN AS Ha PRI ST;, he: l8°. Reform UK: Our Contract with You
FISHING & COASTAL COMMUNITIES
Britain’s Fishing Industry
Reform UK will seize the hugeBan Foreign Supertrawlers from UK Waters opportunity to renew our fishingExtend the ban on pair trawling for bass beyond the industry and revive our coastalSouth East and l2mile territorial waters. Ban Dutch communities. vessels from electric pulse fishing in Britain's 2OO mile EEZ.
FIRST lOO DAYS: Rebuild UK Fish Processing
Stop EU Fishers Taking UK QuotasTax and other incentives to ensure that all fish caught in British waters are landed and processed
End automatic access to UK waters, Every foreignin the UK. Fish caught by foreign vessels in UK fishing vessel must pay for a licence to gain accesswaters should also be landed and processed here to the Uk’'s 2OO nautical mile Exclusive Economicwhen capacity allows.
Zone (EEZ), as designated under the United Nationsate ete:
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). StopRevitalise the UK's Fishing Fleet
Foreign Owners using British flags of convenience. Tax incentives and vocational training to increase
Quota reforms needed to help small scale fishing. UK fishing fleets. Include fishing communities in
Expand the Royal Navy Overseas Patrolpolicy making.
SquadronGuarantee Sustainable Stocks
Police Britain’s 2OO nautical mile EEZ properly. Implement a ‘dynamic management system’.
Assess the possibility of creating a dedicated coastWork with national and regional partners such as guard or fisheries protection agency. the North East Atlantic Fisheries Commission.
h di a ie“Reviving
/ Aitour coastal f/ BTScommunities.
WAx-_ee e: woz fas VitRevitalising eeTA Ih AIi aeour fishing
~aon I \Cf-* (ce eSindustry.” oe A Ifi Wa iy pb- pil _:_-
--Ii FISHING AND COASTAL COMMUNITIES aae‘ _s PLEDGES COSTS £2 BILLION PAReform UK: Our Contract with You
PENSIONS AND SOCIAL CARE ith Dignity and Respect
Reform UK will ensure that ouron hundreds of millions of profits through complex elderly people can live withoffshore property company structures and high dignity through long-terminterest shareholder loans. This has to end.
reforms funded by a growingThereafter:
economy. Review Pension Provision
The current pension system is riddled with
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THEcomplexity, huge cost and poor returns leading to
FIRST lOO DAYS: less uptake. Countries like Australia do savings and
Commence Royal Commission of Inquiry intopensions much better and cheaper than we do and
Social Care Systemfrom a much younger age.
A national plan is critical for a sustainable socialEnd the Mineworkers Pension Scandal care system. The sector needs flexibility, tax. We accept the Business, Energy and Industrial
Incentives, VAT breaks and less waste. SimplifyStrategy Committee 2O2l recommendations in social care through a single funding stream, full to amend the Mineworkers Pension Scheme instead of the split between NHS and Localarrangements so that all the
Authorities. More funding will be needed whenscheme surpluses accrue a national plan is agreed. to the Mineworkers.
Stop the Offshore Taxpayer Rip Off“Reform UK
Some larger care home providers are avoiding taxwill treat our elderly with the
Tig rr"egYAR
Vay eePyI IaT) \respect they é‘The,»Say)” aFes a I Ideserve.
a - a, re 7 44 wy 4 I~ eC, id
}oN:4 a
$ye I > Caer: Y%smia 'ai?), y ’ oa.: PeSF3 > hate: sad: A a: A3, BS IPaes
-qweI~'-~ <7
‘¢ oeReform UK: Our Contract with You
“Reform UK
CONSTITUTIONAL REFORMwill make Britain e, eea fully sovereign
’_Britain’s Constitutionaldemocratic
Arrangements Need Reform “ TMeTM
We will end the corruption ofsuccessful professionals from the private sector, our government and politicswho are political appointees, who come and go with the government.
by an outof-touch, Londoncentric elite to make Britain asence Reform of the Postal Voting
9stem more democratic, accountable,¥..
and therefore more prosperousPostal voting nas allowed electoral fraud. We will nationstop postal voting except for the elderly, disabled or
°those who can't leave their homes.
CRITICAL REFORMS NEEDED IN THE...
FIRST lOO DAYS: Proportional Representation Voting for the
House of Commons
Leave the European Convention on Human
RightsLarge numbers of voters have no representation in parliament and new parties are shut out of the
Commence reform of the Human Rights Act sothat political system. Voter turnout could be some lO% it puts the rights of law-abiding people first. higher with PR. A referendum is needed.
Commence Reform of the House of Lords &A British Bill of Rights
Civil ServiceOur freedoms must be codified and guaranteed.
Replace the crony-filled House of Lords with aNever again can our entire country be locked down much smaller, more democratic second chamber. on shoddy evidence and lies. Our data and privacy
Structure to be debated. Immediate end of politicalmust be protected. Surveillance of the public must appointees. Replace Civil Service leaders withbe limited and those monitoring us held to account.
- aa7
CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM
PLEDGES £ NEUTRAL
REFORM UK 2O242lReform UK: Our Contract with You
RECLAIMING BRITAIN e@e
Reform is Needed to‘Upholding
British culture,
Defend and Promoteidentity, and ee°values.”
British Culture, Identity
Reform UK will uphold BritishPropose a Comprehensive Free Speech Bill values and legislate againstLegislate to stop left-wing bias and politically correct extremist forces that seek toideology that threatens personal freedom and undermine our way of life. democracy. No more debanking, cancel culture, left wing hate mobs or political bias in public institutions. Stop Sharia law being used in the UK.
FIRST lOO DAYS: Commence Reform of the BBC
Reaffirm British SovereigntyThe outof-touch wasteful BBC is institutionally biased. The TV licence is taxation without
Reject the influence of the World Economic Forum. representation. We will scrap it. In a world of
Reject the World Health Organisation (WHO)ondemand TV People should be free to choose.
Pandemic Treaty and cancel our membership of, way the WHO unless there is fundamental reform to itsMake st George s and St David's Day a structure and funding. Reform UK also opposes thePublic Holiday
Creation of a Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC). English national identity should be officially
We oppose a cashless society. promoted and celebrated, not ignored or banned.
Replace the 2OlO Equalities ActLaunch an Anti-Corruption Unit for
The Equalities Act requires discrimination inWestminster the name of ‘positive action’. We will scrapWe will ensure that public officials face sanctions
Diversity, Equality and Inclusion (DE&l) rules thatif they break the rules, including prison. Our new have lowered standards and reduced economicAnti-Corruption Unit will have legal powers to productivity. investigate past and future scandals.
Ne > ¢Pai-~
AiytRECLAIMING BRITAIN etIffPLEDGES £ NEUTRAL
[ REFORM UK 2O) a _- a22Reform UK: Our Contract with You
SAVINGS PLEDGES. Annualised Savings Over 5 Year
Policy Area.-
Electoral Term Amount in £ billions
Immigration Savings £5
Employer Immigration Tax £4
Energy Savings - tax subsidies & scrap Net£3O
Zero
Benefit Saving - l million plus back to work £l5
Transport & Utilities Savings £5
Slash wasteful Government spending
Save £5 in lOO incl govt depts. quangos,£5O commissions
Stop bank interest on QE reserves £35
Cut foreign aid by 5O% £6
Sub-Total Potential Savings £l5O billion pa Almost £3, OOO per Adult
EXTRA GROWTH ASSUMPTION
Policy Area
Economy - Personal Pledges
Economy - Business Pledges
Energy Pledges
Brexit Pledges
Overall
Proposals will create l - l.5% extra growth pa
Extra l% pa GDP £25 bn
Tax @ 4O% spend £lO bn
Total Extra Growth Assumption £lO billion pa of extra tax revenues
TOTAL SAVINGS and EXTRA GROWTH POTENTIAL £l6O BILLION PA
REFORM UK 2O2423Reform UK: Our Contract with You
COST PLEDGES. Annualised Cost Over 5 Year
Policy Area.-
Electoral Term Amount in £ billions
Economy - Personal Pledges£7O
Economy - Business Pledges£l8
NHS Pledges £l7
Policing Pledges£3
Justice Pledges£2
Education Pledges£5
Defence Pledges £l4
Children and Families Pledges£8
Agriculture Pledges£2
Fishing and Coastal Communities Pledges £2
TOTAL COST £l4l BILLION
REFORM UK 2O24247
_Sf ae y(. aeannie
(ow Fon ae y ]’é&ad. i,: s; I a et\Th) Te
AReform UK
83 Victoria Street,
London SWlH OHW,
United Kingdom
Ph: O8OO 4l4 8525
Published and Promoted by Paul Oakden on behalf of Reform UK.
Both of 83 Victoria Street, London SWlH OHW