~ a
7 SECURE FUTURE),))) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION SECURE FUTURE ) }
Contents
DP FOPOQWOT oon cccccccsssssssnesssssssnccecccssecscsessunsuunusnnsnsnnsenssessssssessususuuussnsssnesessssessecseessessumuununnssanensceeseceseecesensuuunnsnnnnsnssseessececeeeee
) Bold actions to deliver a secure future for our country and for your family4
) Our plan for a secure, dynaMic ANd Growing CCOMOMY. cccs: cccossssssesssessssnssessesnseessesnseesseeee D
2 Our plan to Cut taxes AN Protect PEMSIONS... O ccc ccccccccsssssssssssunssnssssesessnnssssssessesnnnnscsssssessnsseessee TD
D Our plan to SUPPOTtt FAMIMIIS 22. cccccccscssssesssssscseessnnscnncccsessunnnnnssscesesunssnnssccessnunnssesseseessunsssesessssssunnscesssee’ D
) Our plan to get more people into work and build a fairer welfare system2l
) Our plan to give young people the opportunities and skills they need25
) Our plan to secure our nation from global UNncertaimty ccc ccessssssssesesssesnnneessesnneeee 2D
)} Our plan to control immigration and stop illegal imMigration O. O. O. O... cece OD
)» Our plan to deliver better health and Social CAPE lc cccssssssssssssssssssssssssssustsnsssnsenesenneeeeene dD
) Our plan for safer streets and justice for VICTIMS OF CHIME... cseesssssssseeeeeeesteneeeeeenee
» Our plan for an affordable and pragmatic transition to Met ZETO ccs ed
) Our plan to build more houses in the right places... ecssssssssseessssnsessesesnneeeessnneeseeeenneese
D Our plan to strengthen COMMUMI*IEI)S oc cccccccccccessssssssssssunsnccsssseessunssnessssssssunnsecssesesssunssscesssssssnnseeeees DD
) Our plan to back farmers and fisheries to grow our fOOd SECUTITY eee eesssseeeeee l
) Our plan to support our rural way of life and enhance our environment65
) Our plan to support sport and the Creative SOCCON oo... ccccccccccccccesssssssssssssssessssssssseuunssssssssneeseeeee OD
) Our plan to strengthen the United Kingdom.. O. O.. O. O... Occccccccessssssssssssssssnseesssnssssesesnseeesesunseeseesneeeeee AA
The Conservative and Unionist Party Manifesto 2O24l) )) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) }
We are restoring our economic stability afterA future, where national, border, energy and
Covid and Ukraine. Inflation is down, realfood security are put first, not taken for granted, wages are up, growth has returned - andand immigration is never allowed to run out of we are cutting taxes to give working peoplecontrol.
financial security. This did not happen by accident. The economy is turning a cornerA future where family is always supported and because we built strong economic foundationscommunities decide their own priorities, rather before the pandemic and we have stuck to ourthan having them imposed from above.
plan. A future where we can have pride - in
We must stick to this plan and take bold actionourselves, in our communities and in our to secure the future of our nation and society. country.
In the next decade, we’ll face challenges to.
Our energy and national security from foreignThere Is only one way to secure that future - conflicts; to our border from uncontrolled andand that is to vote Conservative on 4 July.
illegal migration; to our economy from globalWe must stick with the plan - a plan that has shocks and to our society from those seekinggiven four million more people the security to divide and disempower communities. and purpose of a job, cut taxes for 29 million
Dealing with these challenges requires a clearworking people, protected pensioners with plan and bold action. the Triple Lock, delivered more than 2.5
We have that plan and the courage to take themillion homes, recruited record numbers of bold steps necessary to build a secure futurepolice officers to cut crime by more than 5O%, for you and your family, recruited record numbers of teachers to help our children become the best readers in the
A future where hard work and doing the rightWest, delivered the largest sustained increase thing is always rewarded, not punished within defence spending since the end of the Cold higher taxes and hidden green levies, orWar and got Brexit done.
discouraged with unconstrained welfare. a
The alternative is we go back to square one.
A future where aspiration and opportunity areTo a fragile economy under Labour driven celebrated and young people always get theby unfunded spending, higher taxes on skills they need to succeed. working families and debt piling up for future generations to pay off. And where immigration,
A future where public services, like the NHS, crime and defence are not taken seriously.
serve citizens not vested interests, and every citizen upholds British values of decency, On 4 July, choose lower immigration, lower democracy and service. taxes and protected pensions. Choose a secure future with the Conservatives.
The Rt Hon Rishi Sunak
Prime Minister and
Leader of the Conservative and Unionist Party
The Conservative and Unionist Party Manifesto 2O243) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) }
Bold actions to deliver a secure future for our country and for your family
To support working people and secure aTo safeguard our borders and national stronger economysecurity
) Cut tax for workers by taking another 2p off) Boost defence spending to our new NATO employee National Insurance so that we will havestandard of 2.5% of GDP by 2O3O, so we can halved it from l2% at the beginning of this year to 6%protect British interests at home and abroad in an by April 2O27, a total tax cut of £l,35O for the averageincreasingly hostile world.
worker on £35, OOO ~ and the next step in our long-) Introduce a legal cap on migration to guarantee term ambition to end the double tax on work whenthat numbers will fall every year, so public financial conditions allow. services are protected while bringing in the skills
) Cut taxes to support the self-employed by abolishingour businesses and NHS needs.
the main rate of self-employed National Insurance) Stop the boats by removing illegal migrants to entirely by the end of the Parliament. Rwanda
) Cut tax for pensioners with the new Triple Lock Plus,) Work with other countries to rewrite asylum guaranteeing that both the State Pension and the taxtreaties to make them fit for the challenges we free allowance for pensioners always rise with theface highest of inflation, earnings or 2.5% - so the new,
State Pension doesn’t get dragged into income tax. To strengthen our communities
) Give working parents 3O hours of free childcare a) Increase NHS spending above inflation every week from when their child is nine months old toitina 92. OOOd 28. OOO when they start school, saving eligible families anyear, recruiting 92, more nurses an, average or ee 9OO er ear g engmore doctors, driving up productivity in the NHS g, per year. and moving care closer to people’s homes through
) End the unfairness in Child Benefit by moving to aPharmacy First, new and modernised GP surgeries household system, so families don’t start losing Childand more Community Diagnostic Centres.
Benefit until their combined income reaches £l2O, OOO ) Protect female-only spaces and competitiveness in
- saving the average family which benefits £l,5OO. sport by making clear that sex means biological
) Cut the cost of net zero for consumers by taking asex in the Equality Act.
more pragmatic approach, guaranteeing no new. ay::.
green levies or charges while accelerating the rollout, “ight places while wrotecting our countryside, of renewables. permanently abolish Stamp Duty for homes up
) Seize the benefits of Brexit by signing further tradeto £425, OOO for first time buyers and introduce a deals, speeding up infrastructure and unblockingnew Help to Buy scheme.
lOO, OOO h; itfor busi,..
creating new fching ooportunitics.. usiness, and) Recruit 8, OOO more full-time, fully warranted, police officers to ensure a new police officer for
To provide young people with a secure futureevery neighbourhood.:. se) Cut anti-social behaviour in town centres by
) Give young people the skills and opportunities theyrolling out Hotspot Policing, expanding community deserve by introducing mandatory National Servicepayback and legislating to evict social tenants who for all school leavers at l8, with the choice between arepeatedly disrupt their neighbours competitive placement in the military or civic servicePyPg, roles.) Invest £36 billion in local roads, rail and buses..:. to drive regional growth, including £8.3 billion
) Fund lOO, OOO high-quality apprenticeships for youngto fill potholes and resurface roads, funded by people, paid for by curbing the number of poor-qualitycancelling the second phase of HS2 university degrees that leave young people worse off.,
) Protect children by requiring schools to ban the use) the London Mevor’ Wee Soaksion end spelyieg of mobile phones during the school day and ensuringlocal referendums to new 2Omph zones and Low parents can see what their children are being taught, Traffic Neighbourhoods especially on sensitive matters like sex education. g,
F..)} Champion our rural communities by backin
) Transform l6l9 education by introducing thefarmers with a legal target and additional,
Advanced British Standard, enabling young peopleinvestment for food security, and protecting our to receive a broader education and removing thebest agricultural land from solar farms artificial divide between academic and technicalg, learning.} Continue to directly invest in communities across
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland, protect the UK’s internal market and the integrity of our
United Kingdom. Our plan fora secure, dynamic and growing economy) )) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) ]
)) In 2OlO we inherited anfinances after 2OlO, which saw the deficit fall from.. lO.3% under Labour to 2. l% on the eve of the economy In tatters, with Labourpandeniic, that we were able to provide almost admitting themselves there was£4OO billion of support to families and businesses
‘no money’. We have faced threeto get through Covid and the energy shock.
generational global economicThe only way to give people the peace of challenges: the aftermath of themind that government will be able to support financial crisis; a global pandemic; them again when future shocks hit is to get.. borrowing and debt down. The alternative is to and the biggest energy shock sincelet borrowing get out of control, driving inflation the l97Os. and interest rates up, and leaving our children and grandchildren to pick up the bill.
Against this backdrop, since 2OlO the UK has had the third highest growth rate in the G7. In the next Parliament, we will continue to meet
We have created four million more jobs, cutour fiscal rules of having public sector net debt taxes for working people and pensioners andfalling and for public sector net borrowing to repaired the public finances. The UK economybe below 3% of GDP in the fifth year of the is now growing faster than Germany, France, forecast. The measures in this manifesto
Italy and the United States, real wages haveare fully funded and would result in lower been rising for nearly a year, inflation has fallenborrowing in 2O293O, which will be the from lll% to 2.3%, lower than in Europe and thetarget year for our fiscal rules in the first fiscal
US, and debt as a share of GDP is forecast toevent of the new Parliament.
start falling next year. The plan we set out last year, to halve inflation, grow the economy andBacking business to invest, reduce debt, is working. innovate and trade
Economic security is the bedrock of any future success, which is why we have a clear plan toA competitive tax system take the bold action needed to build a strong economy. The Conservative Party will always be the;; party of business. It is the private sector
} reducing borrowing and debt, which will unlock the investment, growth and
) backing businesses to invest, innovate andopportunities of the future.
trade;.._
That is why a tax system that incentivises
} cutting taxes and reforming our welfarebusiness to invest is at the heart of our system; economic plan. We introduced the biggest
Lk. business tax cut in modern British history,
) delivering world-class education; andwhich hundreds of business leaders have
) delivering an affordable transition todescribed as the ‘single most transformational’ domestic, sustainable energy. measure for growth and investment. So more businesses can benefit, we will look to extend eour ‘full expensing’ policy to leasing, once
Reducing debt andthe fiscal conditions allow. And we will not borrowingraise corporation tax. For the very smallest businesses, the four million people who are
Sustainable public finances are essential for aself-employed, we will abolish the main rate strong economic plan. It was only because of theof National Insurance entirely by the end difficult decisions we took to repair the publicof the next Parliament. We will back the risk
6) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) } takers and entrepreneurs who help drive ourProperty Relief and Business Relief. We will not economy. increase Capital Gains Tax.
Small and medium-sized businesses are the6. Promote digital invoicing and improve lifeblood of our economy and we are makingenforcement of the Prompt Payment Code the UK the best place in the world to start orto support small businesses with the perennial grow a business. We have great foundations: challenge of cashflow, building on our creation of world-class talent, an internationally enviedthe Small Business Commissioner with powers to legal system and a business-friendly regulatory _ tackle unfavourable payment practices.
environment.7. Ensure that Basel III capital requirements do gn.. not inhibit lending to SMEs.
We are supporting firms with a business ratesining support package worth £4.3 billion over the8. Continue our world leading programmes next five years to support small businessesincluding the Invest in Women Task Force and and the high street. We want small businessesthe Lilac Review to encourage more female and to get a bigger share of public contracts anddisabled entrepreneurs.
have improved the public sector procurement9. Work with the British Business Bank and system to that end. We have made it easierprivate sector fund managers to secure a £25O and cheaper for small businesses to hire anmillion Invest In Women Fund to support female apprentice. And we have taken 28, OOO smallentrepreneurs.
businesses out of paying VAT altogether by raising the VAT registration threshold tolO. Work with public sector organisations
£9O, OOO. In the next Parliament, we will deliverincluding local authorities and NHS trusts a ten point plan to support SMEs: and companies benefitting from government.. contracts to ensure that procurement l. Continue to ease the burden of businesseae:... ooopportunities are focused on SMEs in their local rates for high street, leisure and hospitality: FF economies where possible and practical.
businesses by increasing the multiplier on distribution warehouses that support onlineInvesting in infrastructure shopping over time.
2. Keep the VAT threshold under review andA Conservative Government will continue explore options to smooth the cliff edge atto invest in the digital, transport and energy
£9O. OOOinfrastructure needed for businesses to grow.
3. Improve access to finance for SMEs includingWe have transformed our digital infrastructure through expanding Open Finance and byby rolling out gigabit broadband to over a exploring the creation of Regional Mutual Banks. million hard to reach premises, helping to: deliver high-speed internet to over 8O% of
4. Take more companies out of the scope of.
burdensomortina rirements, Makinthe country. We are set to achieve at least urelensome reporting requirements. Waning85% gigabit coverage of the UK by 2O25 and use of freedoms granted by Brexit, we will lift the.. as.. nationwide coverage by 2O3O. Our ambition employee threshold allowing more companies to.... ais for all populated areas to be covered by be considered medium-sized. This is expected to;;... a. standalone’ 5G mobile connectivity and to save small businesses at least one million hours.. keep the UK at the forefront of adopting and of admin per year..
developing 6G.
5. Retain key tax incentives that encourage
Enterprise Investment Scheme, Seed Enterprisetransport projects that will benefit more people,
Investment Scheme, Venture Capital Trusts, in more places, more quickly. Every penny
Business Asset Disposal Relief, Agriculturalsaved in the North or Midlands will be spent there. Savings from our new plan for Euston,
The Conservative and Unionist Party Manifesto 2O247) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) which will see lO, OOO new homes built, havestarting with the 5O stations announced in freed up £6.5 billion for transport across theMay.
rest of the country
) Deliver upgrades to railways in the South
Labour has no plan. They neither supportWest, including the line through Dawlish, the the second phase of HS2 nor our alternativeEnergy Coast Line in Cumbria and the Ely package of investment, meaning they won’tJunction scheme in East Anglia.
back schemes their own local leaders say will. tee.
transform their areas. We will:) Electrify the North Wales Main Line with
£l billion of investment and alleviate pinch
) Invest £4.7 billion for smaller cities, townspoints on the A75 between Gretna and and rural areas in the North and MidlandsStranraer.
to spend on their transport priorities. This willoo..
cut congestion and upgrade local bus and) Reopen Beeching lines and stations to train stations. reconnect communities around the country, building on the success of the Dartmoor Line
) Invest a record £8.3 billion of investmentin the South West. We are committed to all to fill potholes and resurface roads. We willthe schemes set out in the Network North bring forward funding into this financial yearCommand Paper.
and the next...: easThis comes on top of £44 billion of funding
) Back our city regions with an additional; for Network Rail over the next five years and
£8.55 billion to spend on their local priorities. our investment in the Transpennine Route
We will scrap rules that stop Mayors investingUpgrade, laying the foundations for Northern in strategic roads. Powerhouse Rail. We will complete HS2
) Deliver our plan for Northern Powerhousebetween London Euston and the West Midlands
Rail bringing more frequent trains, moreand support the growth of the rail freight sector.
capacity and faster journeys. We haveWe have invested £4O billion in England's committed £l2 billion on top of our HS2strategic roads between 2Ol5 and 2O25, with savings to deliver the section of Northernfurther investment to come in the next Road
Powerhouse Rail between Manchester andInvestment Strategy, ensuring we can deliver
Liverpool. Savings from HS2 enable us tomajor roads including the Lower Thames fund electrification to Hull and build a newCrossing and the A3O3. This is alongside the station in Bradford. road schemes set out in our Network North. te.. plan, including the Al between Morpeth and
) Boost rail connectivity in the Midlands, Ellingham.
with £l.75 billion to fund the Midlands Rail
Hub in full. This will improve journey timesAutomated vehicles will be on British roads in and deliver more frequent rail services atthe next Parliament, thanks to our new world5O stations, benefiting over seven millionleading legislation. We will support people to people. We will upgrade the line betweenchoose electric cars by ensuring our charging
Newark and Nottingham to halve journeyinfrastructure is truly nationwide, including rapid times between Nottingham and Leeds. charging and delivering the Zero Emission
Vehicle Mandate to support manufacturers to
) Provide an additional £l billion to supportsafeguard skilled British jobs.
hundreds of new bus routes across the
North and Midlands. We will support the growth and decarbonisation of our aviation sector. We will back British
) Improve accessibility at lOO train stations, Sustainable Aviation Fuel through our SAF) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) } mandate, an industry-backed revenue supportspace industry.
mechanism and investment in future aviation tic fliSecuring the UK’s position as a world echnology. We will support domestic flights..
including through Public Service Obligations, leader in innovation protecting vital routes within the UK, includingvp eps... Artificial intelligence (Al) will accelerate human to islands and remote areas..:
progress in the 2lst century, just as the steam
We will back our maritime sector, includingengine and electricity did in the l9th century.
shipping and ports, as it decarbonises. Recognising.... The UK is well positioned to spearhead this the current challenges with cross-Solent transport,:;; transformation and is already leading global we will establish a review to explore all options to work on Al safety. Over the last l4 years, the provide more choice and drive down fares. We will:‘
Conservatives have turned the UK into a foster our science and innovation expertise in the;:.
science and innovation superpower. The UK now has the highest level of direct government funding and tax support for business research and development (R&D) of any country in the
Speeding upOECD. We pioneered the fastest development;; and deployment of the Covid vaccine. The infrastructure delive ryUK has Europe’s leading tech ecosystem. We; I.-have secured improved financial terms to join
We can only achieve our infrastructure ambitions if weHorizon continue to simplify the planning system to make it easier to build, faster. We will speed up the average time it takes toIn the next Parliament, we will:
sign off major infrastructure projects from four years to..
-) Increase public spending on R&D to £22 one. We will:. billion a year, up from £2O billion this year.
) Introduce reforms to outdated EU red tape to better protect nature while enabling the building of new homes, new) Maintain our R&D tax reliefs. Recent prisons and new energy schemes. Along with the reformschanges worth £28O million a year have to the EU’s bureaucratic environmental impact assessmentsimplified and improved R&D tax reliefs, regime that we have already started, these changes willincluding by bringing more SMEs into speed up local and national infrastructure planningscope of the relief.
systemswee.) Continue investing over £l.5 billion in
) Busy any requirements to offset the impact of alarge-scale compute clusters, assembling ines @ and homes om anal “ ‘ € " oportionate, the raw processing power so we can without compromising environmental outcomestake advantage of the potential of Al
) Reduce the cost of infrastructure by allowing quickerand support research into its safe and changes to consented projects. responsible use.
ew atonal Paliev Ct, orer orhr ©? Ensure National Policy Statements are regularly updated.) Push forward with our Advanced? Focus the role of statutory consultees in the planningManufacturing Plan, providing a £4.5 system on improving projects in line with clearerbillion commitment to secure strategic objectives, rather than piecemeal requirements that addmanufacturing sectors including delays. automotive, aerospace, life sciences and? End frivolous legal challenges that frustrate infrastructureclean energy.
delivery by amending the law so judicial reviews that don’tF: soy ay) Build on the success of our nine specialist have merit do not waste court time...,
Catapults, which support innovation and derisk the transition from research and) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) delivery, distributing £l.6 billion of fundingBritish businesses thrive across the country by 2O28.
The UK is a global exporting superpower and is
We are proud to be the leading market fornow the fourth biggest exporter in the world, starting and growing a FinTech firm - part ofhaving overtaken France, the Netherlands, and our world-leading financial and professionalJapan.
services which supports the employment of almost 2.5 million people. We will build onHaving left the EU, we have seized the the policies set out in the Edinburgh Reformsopportunity to negotiate trade deals that suit so that the UK continues to be the world’sthe UK, boosting our exports and creating jobs most innovative and competitive globalat home. UK exports are growing, reaching financial centre. We will support the City of£85O billion last year and service exports are at
London’s position as the leading global marketan all-time high. We have secured trade deals through the implementation of the Mansionwith 73 countries plus the EU and last year
House reforms and measures such as a retailwe removed £l million of trade barriers every sale of NatWest shares. We will maintain thesingle hour.
highest standards of consumer protection and..
prudential regulation to ensure there can neverLast year we signed a deal to Join the be a repeat of the banking crisis under the lastComprehensive and Progressive Agreement
Labour Government. for Trans-Pacific Partnership (CPTPP), a modern and ambitious trade deal spanning economies
The UK car industry is the jewel of ouracross Asia and the Pacific. With the UK as a manufacturing crown. Last year the UK builtmember, it will account for l5% of global GDP over a million vehicles and secured £23.7and in time is expected to boost UK GDP by billion of private and public investment. Wearound £2 billion a year.
secured a £4 billion investment in a new... wasWe will complete free trade agreements with battery gigafactory to be built in Somerset,;;;; safeguarding the future of the Jaguar LandIndia and with the Gulf Cooperation Council,
Rover plant in the West Midlands for decadeshome to some of the world's biggest investors.
to come. Contrary to dire warnings that BrexitAnd we will continue to Pursue free trade would lead to major brands leaving our shores. agreements with countries such as Israel and
Nissan is delivering up to £2 billion of newSwitzerland.
investment to produce two new electric vehicleOur Trade and Cooperation Agreement (TCA) models in Sunderland and BMW made a £6OOis the most comprehensive FTA the EU has million investment to produce iconic all-electricever agreed. We will build on it, but will not
Mini Coopers in Oxfordshire. agree to anything in the forthcoming review
We will always back our world-leadingof the TCA that would infringe our legal automotive industry, which facessovereignty or involve submission to the CJEU unprecedented competition from China in theor dynamic alignment. We will take a tough.
electric vehicles market. We stand ready toapproach on ensuring that the EU are meeting support domestic car manufacturers if there istheir commitments under the TCA and not evidence other countries are breaking globaldiscriminating against our exporters.
trade rules. We have always been clear the NHS and the
Building new trade links to helpservices it provides are not on the table in trade negotiations. All food and drink products imported into the UK, including those from countries we have trade agreements with, must comply with the UK’s high standards. We will lO) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) } always stand up for UK agriculture in our tradedraught, such as beer and cider, will be less deals. than in supermarkets.
The US is our single largest trading partner. WeCutting government bureaucracy have signed the Atlantic Declaration and deals with eight US states, including Florida andWe will make government more efficient, cut
Texas, with a combined GDP of £57 trillion. And Waste and attract the best and the brightest, by:
we will look to agree a free trade agreement) Returning the civil service to its prewith the US when they are ready to do so. pandemic size to pay for our commitment
Using our Brexit freedoms to deliverto increase defence spending to 2.5% of regulatory reformGDP.
) Halving the amount of taxpayers’ money
Conservatives believe in reducing the burdenspent on external consultants. We will of regulation, freeing up businesses to thrive.. P4; i.;
We want small businesses free to innovateintroduce controls on all ‘Equality, Diversity balanced with proportionate protectionsand Inclusion’ initiatives and spending.
for consumers and working people. We will) Bring quango spending under control.
never introduce Labour’s package of French-;_,; style union rules, which are a threat to jobs,) Moving 25, OOO more civil servants outside our competitiveness and our economy. Weof London, building on successes like the will go further to transform the UK regulatoryDarlington Economic Campus and hubs in landscape, making sure regulators deliver theStokeon-Trent and Wolverhampton.
best outcomes for business, consumers and. os..
th:') Opening up civil service recruitment by e environment.
virrequiring jobs to be advertised externally to
Thanks to Brexit, we have taken back controlidentify the best candidates.
of our laws and freed British businesses from) Doubling digital and Al expertise in the the ornerie oe ne We legislated ‘ hue, civil service, to take advantage of the latest e principle oaw supremacy and have:..
cndurtaken 3 ooland-brench ey of thetechnologies to transform public services.
more than 6, OOO laws we had inherited fromThese reforms will allow us to achieve a the EU. significant productivity boost in Whitehall. If
We have already repealed or reformed overwe returned public sector productivity to pre2. OOO EU laws and by July 2O26 we willpandemic levels that would deliver up to £2O have repealed or eformea over half of thebillion of annual savings. The NHS Productivity entire stock of EU law we inherited. Only thePlan shows that the public sector can set out
Conservatives will keep on removing EU lawsdetailed plans for achieving a step-change in from our statute book. Our Smarter Regulationproductivity, so we will require all Departments, a: to deliver plans for 2% annual productivity approach has already saved 5O million hours ofwth at thts dina Revi administrative time for business, saving themgro abe NEXT SPENAING REVIEW.
an estimated £l billion. To limit the impact of industrial action on public
We have also used post-Brexit tax freedomsservices and balance the ability of workers. ot,. P.., to strike with the rights of the public, we will including introducing VAT-free installations...,.
_.. continue implementing our Minimum Service of energy-efficient materials and replacingLevels leaislation complex EU alcohol duty rates. And to protectg, our pubs we will maintain our Brexit Pubs
Guarantee that means the duty on drinks on3, a -i a! 4E a 7- _i ae_; zaJ aeta4 eae: a
23i:
A -+
--7i a _- ~-a ed <iat
Ss --- -a eeee
- a7
- a.-_n ae:/ eea, a ss3aa eemc
Se oe -- ae: a
- "a ee -- ne:
e ee elee
- i ie; es ‘- a 7 iOur plan to cut taxes and protect pensions) )) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) ]
)) As Conservatives, we believeinflation increase to the personal allowance we inItblhave delivered since 2OlO, nearly doubling it
In lower taxes Decause people, from £6,475 to £l2,75O.
not governments, make the best decisions about how to spendThis means the tax burden on workers is falling,. with the average earner paying the lowest their money. But we can only evereffective personal tax rate since l975 - lower cut taxes responsibly when wethan in the US, France, Germany or any G7 have a way to fund it sustainably, country.
consistent with getting debt andAs a further downpayment on our long-term borrowing down andina wayambition to abolish National Insurance, there which does not send inflationis one group for whom we will make that ooa reality in the next Parliament. Last year, spiralling. the main rate of National Insurance for the; self-employed stood at 9%. To recognise
Because of the support we provided to familiesthe unique contribution of these risk-takers and businesses through Covid and the energyand entrepreneurs to our economy and shock, we had to make difficult decisions tothe insecurity they face without the rights pay down our debts. But we were clear thatand protections that employees enjoy, once inflation was under control and the public. so:.;; we will abolish it entirely by the end of finances were on a sustainable path, we wouldthe next Parliament. The abolition of the cut taxes. Because of the progress we have:.; main rate of Class 4 National Insurance made, with inflation back to normal and debt oncontributions builds on our abolition of Class track to fall from next year, we have been able2 contributions for self-employed people to afford to begin cutting taxes as part of ourfrom April this year. This will not affect their plan to reward work and grow the economy, entitlement to the State Pension. This is a all without INCTEASING borrowing or cuttingmassive simplification of the tax system which spending on public services. means that 93% of self-employed people - four million of them - will no longer pay selfCutting tax for workingemployed National Insurance.
peopleAs well as cutting National Insurance for 29
In the first half of this year, we began cuttingmillion people, we will also not raise the rate
National Insurance. It is unfair that workingof income tax or VAT.
people pay two taxes on their income - income tax and National Insurance - when otherIncreasing pay for working people only pay income tax. people
Our long-term ambition, when it is affordableWe introduced the National Living Wage in to do 8O; is to keep cutting National Insurance2Ol6 and this year achieved our ambition of until it's gone, * ee en. make theraising it to two thirds of median earnings - in thet plan see sill cat cmployee Notional”increasing it to £ll.44 per hour and extending it,.. to cover all workers aged over 2l. This ended
Insurance to 6% by April 2O27 ~ meaninglow pay for those on the National Living Wage, that we will have halved it from l2% at thewith someone working full-time receiving a pay er aeo re renee a total tax cut ofrise worth £l,8OO. As a result of our personal
’ge worker on £35, OOO. tax cuts and increases in the minimum wage,
This comes on top of the significant above:
the take-home pay of someone working full l4) )) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) time on the National Living Wage has gone2. Ensuring that from next year the taxup by 35% in real terms since 2OlO. free personal allowance for pensioners. oalso rises by the highest of prices,
We will maintain the National Living Wage.°.
in each year of the next Parliament atearnings or 2.5%, guaranteeing that two-thirds of median earnings. On currentthe new State Pension is always below forecasts, that would mean it rising to aroundthe tax-free threshold. From April 2O25,
£l3 per hour, up from a minimum wage of £5.8Owe will increase the personal allowance under Labour in 2OlO. for pensioners by introducing a new age-related personal allowance. This is
We will ensure the UK retains the flexible anda tax cut of around £lOO for eight million dynamic labour market that gives businessespensioners next year - rising to £275 a the confidence to create jobs and invest in theiryear by the end of the Parliament.
workforce. The number of payrolled employees is at a near record high, and there are aroundUnder our new Pensions Tax Guarantee, the four million more people in work than when weConservatives will not introduce any new taxes came to office in 2OlO. on pensions. We will maintain the 25% tax free lump sum and maintain tax relief on pension
Cutting tax for pensionerscontributions at their marginal rate. We will not extend National Insurance to employer pension
We believe that those who have worked hardcontributions.
during their lives should have dignity and. oo...
security in their retirement. We came to powerWe will maintain all current pensioner benefits, in 2OlO after Labour had hit pensioners with aincluding free bus passes, Winter Fuel
£ll8 billion pensions tax raid and a paltry 75pPayments, free prescriptions and TV licences.
per week increase to the State Pension. We are carefully considering the Ombudsman report into WASPI women and will work with
Since 2OlO, we have made it a priority to giveParliament to provide an appropriate and swift people peace of mind in their retirement. Weresponse.
introduced the Triple Lock, which has seen the.., basic State Pension rise by £3,7OO since 2OlO, BY OPPasing the Triple Lock Plus, Labour's
This year, the new State Pension increased byRetirement Tax will mean millions of pensioners
£9OO. paying more tax. It will also mean that for the first time in history, someone whose
We will continue to do everything we can toonly income is the new State Pension will provide pensioners with dignity in retirementbe dragged into paying income tax, which and ensure the new State Pension is notalongside making them worse off means the dragged into income tax for the first time inadministrative burden of going through a tax history by introducing the new Triple Lockassessment.
Plus. This has two elements:
l. Continuing to uprate the State Pension inClamping down on tax line with the highest of prices, earningsavoidance or 2.5%. On current forecasts, this will mean the new State Pension increases byIt is vital we make sure people and companies a further £43O in April next year to £ll,97O; are paying the tax they owe. That's why, and increases by £l,685 a year to £l3,2OOsince 2OlO, Conservative Governments have, introduced over 2OO measures to tackle tax by the end of the Parliament. non-compliance. In total across all the fiscal events we have delivered since 2OlO, the OBR) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION } SECURE FUTURE ) ] has scored these measures as raising £95 billion across the forecasts it has produced -
£6.7 billion for each year. Building on that, we will raise at least a further £6 billion a year from tackling tax avoidance and evasion by the end of the Parliament.
l6Our plan to support families
)) EARL
‘yes) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ).. local authorities. We will go further to deliver plan to deliver a brighter futurea Family Hub in every local authority in for the UK, one where familiesEngland.
are supported and children are_.. We will improve the experiences of children given the best chance to gain thein social care, because every child deserves skills they need to succeed. Weto live in a safe and loving home. We will are delivering the largest evercreate more places in children’s homes while prioritising keeping families together where expansion of childcare in history: that’s best for the child through our Kinship
) Working parents of two-year-olds are nowCare Strategy and helping children grow up in able to access l5 hours of free childcare, loving adoptive families where that is a better with over 2OO, OOO two-year-olds alreadyoption. We will also support those leaving care benefitting from the offer. with housing, education and employment, in addition to expanding befriending and
} From September 2O24, eligible parentsmentoring programmes for care leavers.
of children between nine months and two years old will also be able to access l5Cutting tax for families hours free childcare.
) From September 2O25, all eligible parentsIn April, we raised the threshold at which with children from nine months old to whenindividuals begin to lose Child Benefit from.£5O, OOO to £6O, OOO and halved the rate at which they start school will be able to access 3Oolor_... a.. it is withdrawn. This is the right thing for families hours of free childcare a week. and the right thing for the economy.
) Once the roll out is completed, families will save an average of £6,9OO per year. But it still isn’t fair that single earner households can start losing their Child Benefit when a
To help the childcare sector expand we havehousehold with two working parents and a committed to increasing hourly funding ratesmuch higher total income can keep it in full.
over the next two years by an estimated £5OOWe will end this unfairness by moving to a million and are helping the sector, includinghousehold rather than individual basis for childminders, to hire more staff, create moreChild Benefit. So nobody is worse off than places and spend less time on paperwork. And -_-- under the current system, we will set the to give working parents more flexibility, we arecombined household income at which a family investing £3OO million so that all parents canwill start losing Child Benefit at £l2O, OOO and access wraparound childcare before and aftergradually remove it until household income school by September 2O26. reaches £l6O, OOO, above which families will no longer receive Child Benefit. This will benefit
But families’ needs don’t stop when childrenover 7OO, OOO households, each gaining an start primary school, which is why Familyaverage of £l,48O a year.
Hubs support families all the way up until children reach adulthood. They back families in the early years, helping with things like breastfeeding support, antenatal care and early learning interventions, in addition to services like relationship support, stopping smoking services and youth services. Our plan l8) )) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE )
Protecting children online
Digital technology is a force for good. But as technology develops, we need to respond to the concerns many parents have.
Children are spending much more of their time using screens, often unsupervised, with research finding 63% of eight to llyear-olds are now using social media. We also know that the number of children suffering from mental illness is rising dramatically and children spend less time playing, sleeping and socialising.
In the last decade, we have done more to protect children online than any other country.
From next year, our Online Safety Act will make it a legal requirement for social media firms to protect children from illegal or harmful content online. This includes fining social media companies who shirk their responsibilities to keep children safe.
But we need to do more to protect young people and empower parents to make decisions in the best interests of their children.
We will put our guidance on banning mobile phones in the school day on a statutory footing which will require all schools to operate a ban, as the best schools already do. We will provide funding for schools to help them ban mobile phones where they need it.
We will urgently consult on introducing further parental controls over access to social media.
We know this is a complex area and we need more effective age verification and parental controls. That’s why we will consult widely to get this right, including developing the necessary technology, in partnership with other countries who are considering similar measures. We expect to build on the existing responsibilities set out for social media companies under the Online Safety Act.
The Conservative and Unionist Party Manifesto 2O24l93, a -i a! 4E a 7- _i ae_; zaJ aeta4 eae: a
23i:
A -+
--7i a _- ~-a ed <iat
Ss --- -a eeee
- a7
- a.-_n ae:/ eea, a ss3aa eemc
Se oe -- ae: a
- "a ee -- ne:
e ee elee
- i ie; es ‘- a 7 imore people into a fairer welfare system) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE )
)) We believe in fairness and theWe are now spending £69 billion a year on. benefits for people of working age with a value of hard work. Alongside a taxdisability or health condition, a figure which system that rewards work, we want has risen by two thirds since the pandemic.
a welfare system which supportsBy the end of the decade, that spending is everyone to fulfil their potentialprojected to increase to £9O billion. It would be irresponsible not to take bold action to put and live dignified and independentthe welfare system on a sustainable footing.
lives. There should always be aa. So we will reform the system to make it fairer safety net for those who need itand more sustainable, unlocking the potential most; but those who can work toof millions of people and giving them the and they should be better off forThis next generation of welfare reforms will doing SO. build a system fit for the post-pandemic world.
They will give everyone who can the best
Since 2OlO, we have delivered transformationalpossible chance of returning to work, while reforms to put work at the heart of our welfareproviding the right support to those who need system. We have rolled out Universal Creditit. With fewer people moving onto welfare and and cut its taper rate by lOp in the pound tomore people in work fulfilling their potential, we make work pay. We’ve brought discipline towill save taxpayers £l2 billion a year. To deliver the system through tougher sanctions andthis, we will take a two-pronged approach.
conditionality. We introduced the household benefit cap and the two-child limit to make theFirst, to address the unsustainable rise in system fairer to the taxpayers who pay for itbenefit claims for people of working age with a and ensure benefits are always a safety net, not _- disability or health condition, we will:
a lifestyle choice.) Reform our disability benefits so they
All of this has delivered near record levelsare better targeted and reflect people’s of employment and low unemployment, withgenuine needs, while delivering a steparound four million more people in work sincechange in mental health provision. We we came to office. will improve PIP assessments to provide a more objective consideration of people’s
At the same time, we have protected theneeds and stop the number of claims from most vulnerable, safeguarding millions ofrising unsustainably. While people suffering jobs through the pandemic and deliveringwith mental health conditions face unprecedented support to help householdssignificant challenges, it is not clear that through the energy shock from Putin’s war.._.
they always face the same additional living
Since the pandemic, new challenges havecosts as people with physical disabilities.
emerged. The number of people who areWe will look at the best way to provide economically inactive due to ill health has risensupport, including whether treatment or from 2 million to 2.8 million, with a significantservices could be more appropriate for increase in mental health conditions amongsome people than a monthly cash payment, younger people. As a result, the number ofwhile also delivering a dramatic expansion working age people claiming benefits isin mental health support. At the same time, projected to grow at an unsustainable rate, we will make the assessment process with all the wasted human potential that entails. simpler and fairer for those with the most severe conditions.
22) )) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) }
) Tighten up how the benefits system) Accelerate the rollout of Universal Credit assesses capability for work. Peopleto ensure it always pays to work. We will are now three times more likely to bemove all of those remaining on outdated assessed as not fit for any work and put onlegacy benefits onto Universal Credit, the highest tier of sickness benefits thanremoving disincentives for them to work they were a decade ago. We will changeand ensuring they will always be better off the assessments from September 2O25in work.
so that those with more moderate mental} Continue to clamp down on fraudsters.
health Issues or mobility problems whoSince 2Ol9 we have delivered cumulative could potentially engage with the world ofscored savings of £7.7 billion through work are given tailored support, insteadmeasures we have taken to tackle fraud of being written off on benefits. The OBRin the welfare system. Despite this, the has forecast that these reforms will reducelevel of welfare fraud remains far too high, the number of people on these benefits byhaving more than doubled during the
424, OOO. pandemic. To deliver further savings, we
)} Overhaul the fit note process so thatwill maintain our zero-tolerance approach people are not being signed off sick asto fraud. This will include a new Fraud a default. Currently, 94% of fit notes areBill to give DWP powers similar to that being signed off as ‘not fit for work’. Weof HMRC, so we can treat benefit fraud will design a new system which moveslike we do tax fraud with new powers to the responsibility for issuing fit notesidentify, investigate and pursue fraudsters.
away from our hard-pressed GPs towards specialist work and health professionals, We hugely value the work that unpaid carers do and we will test integrating this with thesupporting their loved ones. We have increased new WorkWell service to provide tailoredCarer's Allowance by almost £l,5OO sinc’ 2OlO, and given employees who are also unpaid support to help people stay in or get backcarers entitlement to a period of unpaid leave.
to work. We will continue to stand behind our carers.
Second, to make sure that being on benefitsThe vast majority of parents work incredibly remains a safety net, not a lifestyle choice, wehard to give their children the best start in will: life, but sadly a small number shirk their
) Introduce tougher sanctions rules soresponsibilities. We will reform the Child people who refuse to take up suitable jobs I Maintenance Service to prevent nonafter l2 months on benefits can have their C°TMMpliance and new laws to help crack cases closed and their benefits removeddown on non-payment. We'll also look at entirely. We will bring forward the newhow the Service can better support victims... of domestic or economic abuse, building on claimant review point for the long-termrecommendations from Dr Samantha Callan’s unemployed from l8 months to l2 months.2O23 Independent Review.
At the claimant review, Work Coaches will set renewed conditions for claimants. If they fail to accept or comply with those conditions, such as refusing a suitable job or a mandatory work placement, their claim will be closed and their benefits will stop.3, a -i a! 4E a 7- _i ae_; zaJ aeta4 eae: a
23i:
A -+
--7i a _- ~-a ed <iat
Ss --- -a eeee
- a7
- a.-_n ae:/ eea, a ss3aa eemc
Se oe -- ae: a
- "a ee -- ne:
e ee elee
- i ie; es ‘- a 7 iOur plan to give young people the opportunities and skills they need) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE )
)) Education is the closest thing weis proven to boost attainment, reduce bullying... and support good behaviour in schools. We will have to a silver bullet, which is why.
attract more talented teachers by expanding since 2OlO we have focused onour recruitment and retention premium and driving up standards in education. reducing workload. From this September, new
English children are now the bestteachers in priority areas and key STEM and. technical subjects will receive bonuses of up readers in the Western world andto £3O, OOO tax-free over five years. We will are llth in the world for maths, upextend the payments to eligible teachers in from 27th when Labour left office in °“" eee tocar eee mu oeys rt anr
2OlO. Children in England now farmolleges, ees OSES!
outperform their peers in Labourrun Wales and SNP-run Scotland. ne will champion excellence in our classrooms.
n primary schools, we will support teachers
We will build on this success toto use tried and tested techniques, including make sure every child gets a world-our world-leading phonics programme and our class education and reaches their @st*"¥ approach to maths, enabling every. child to master the basics before they start full potential. secondary school. We will support children in their transition to secondary school and ensure
Giving every child thethey continue to receive a broad and enriched chance to go toa greateducation during and after-school, including via our multi-million pound Music Hubs.
school
We will mandate two hours of PE every week
Today, 9O% of schools are Good orin primary and secondary schools, supported
Outstanding, up from 68% in 2OlO. Schoolby extending the PE and Sport Premium to funding is at its highest ever level in real termssecondary schools. We will increase funding per pupil and there are record numbers offor School Games Organisers to get more teachers, 27, OOO more than 2OlO. The pupilcompetitive sport into and between schools premium, introduced by the Conservatives inand work with sporting bodies to create more
2Oll, will allocate almost £3 billion next year toUK-wide school competitions like National support disadvantaged children to reach theirFinals, to identify the best sporting talents.
full potential. Free school meals have been extended to more groups of children thanTo keep pace with our global competitors we under any other government over the pastwill introduce the Advanced British Standard, half a century. We will build on this progress ina new approach to l6l9 education which will the next Parliament by protecting dayto-daybuild on the best of A Levels and T Levels.
schools spending in real terms per pupil. We will end the artificial and damaging divide between academic and technical education
None of this progress has been possiblewhich has persisted for far too long. Every without our great teachers. We have hit ouryoung person will spend more time in the
2Ol9 manifesto commitment to introduceclassroom, learning more subjects, including starting salaries of £3O, OOO and are backingEnglish and maths to l8, as they do in most headteachers to manage behaviour andadvanced economies around the world.
enforce discipline. We will require schools to follow our guidance on banning the use ofFor children and young people to benefit from mobile phones during the school day, whichthe bold reforms we have made to education, they must be in school. The legacy of Covid
26) )) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) has made this more difficult. We will continueconcept of gender identity is not taught to to work with schools and local authorities tochildren.
improve school attendance, including through more mental health support, building on ourWe will expand strong academy trusts. This plan that is working - there were 44O, OOObuilds on our record to date, where half of all fewer children persistently absent last yearstate-funded schools are now academies and compared to the year before. And to ensure all Over 7OO free schools have been delivered, children are getting a high-quality education, with more in the pipeline. We will further including those who are home schooled, weprotect parents’ choice on where to send their will legislate to create a register of childrenchild to school, including preserving the rights not in school. of independent and grammar schools. We will lift the cap on faith schools, allowing them to
We will work to strengthen the relationshipoffer more places to children based on faith between schools and parents, including byand encouraging them to expand. We will back delivering new legislation which will make clear, Ofsted to provide clear judgements to parents beyond all doubt, that parents have a right toon the quality and safety of schools. We are see what their child is being taught in schoolrebuilding over 5OO schools through the School and schools must share all materials, especiallyRebuilding Programme, including rebuilding on sensitive matters like relationships and sexor refurbishing every school identified to have education. This builds on the progress we haveRAAC.
already made, having updated Relationships,
Sex and Health Education Guidance toWe will transform education for children introduce clear age-limits on what childrenwith special educational needs, ending the can be taught and guarantee the contestedpostcode lottery of support by delivering
6O, OOO more school places and a further l5 new free schools for children with special educational needs. Instead of penalising independent special schools by taxing them, we will back them because we believe in the right of parents to choose the best education for their child.
Facilitating training and skills at every stage of life
We believe in giving young people the best possible start to their adult lives and going to university is not the only route to success. The Conservatives have prioritised apprenticeships after they were neglected under Labour. Since 2OlO, we have delivered
5.8 million apprenticeships and have created apprenticeship routes into 7O% of occupations, including through degree apprenticeships.
We passed new laws requiring children to be taught about technical education opportunities, not just university routes, and have set up 2l
Institutes of Technology. We will build on this by creating lOO, OOO more apprenticeships
The Conservative and Unionist Party Manifesto 2O2427) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) in England every year by the end of next
Parliament.
We will fund this by changing the law to close university courses in England with the worst outcomes for their students. Courses that have excessive drop-out rates or leave students worse off than had they not gone to university will be prevented from recruiting students by the universities regulator. This will protect students from being missold and the taxpayer from having to pay where the graduate can’t.
We are committed to delivering the best value for students, so have already reformed student loans to make them fairer, meaning no one will pay back more than what they borrowed in real terms. And we will work with universities to ensure students get the contact hours they are promised and their exams get marked.
We will support the National Citizen Service to help young people build confidence and develop the skills they need to thrive.
We will deliver the Lifelong Learning
Entitlement, giving adults the support they need to train, retrain and upskill flexibly throughout their working lives. From the 2O25 academic year, adults will be able to apply for loans to cover new qualifications. We will also continue to expand our adult skills programmes, such as Skills Bootcamps which meet skills shortages.
28Our plan to secure our nation from e'lobal uncertainty sec a) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION } SECURE FUTURE ) ]
)) The world is an increasingly) We have taken action to prevent Iran and. its proxies from attacking the UK and its dangerous place so we will takenartners9 bold action to keep the British
) We have toughened our cyber defences people safe and our homeland© rougneney. and national security laws to protect the secure. Our prosperity depends onnation from terrorists and hostile state our ability to preserve internationalactors.
security. As our record proves,) We have chased dirty money out of the we will do so by deterring ourUK with new measures to protect our adversaries and acting as a forceeconomic security.
for peace and stability in the world. -)_-- We have ripped out Huawei from key;; parts of our telecommunications system
We will fully deliver our new pledge for theand reduced Chinese influence in our defence of the nation. critical national infrastructure and sensitive
We will hit 2.5% of GDP on defence in 2O3Otechnological sectors.
with our fully funded plan. This is the biggest) Due to our post-Brexit freedoms, we have strengthening of our defence since the Coldintroduced a new independent sanctions
War, ensuring we remain the largest defenceregime that we have used to stand up for power in Europe. It will protect our security, human rights around the world in countries cement our UK leadership in NATO and createRussia, Bel more jobs in the UK. such as Russia, Belarus and Iran.
5) We have agreed new trade and security ok NATO biraaels. of rndeals across the world including in Europe, cerence, our collecive spenaing Wouthe Middle East, Africa and the Indo-Pacific.
increase by over £l4O billion. Therefore, we will launch a campaign to set a new baseline of) We have delivered major new investment.
2.5% for all NATO allies by 2O3O. The Integrated Review was supported by
_;; an additional £24 billion and the Integrated
We will invest in the vital capabilities of theReview Refresh by an additional £5 billion future, to give our Armed Forces the best;. y._to invest in stockpiles and our nuclear equipment to do their job.; enterprise. We have pledged over £l2 ee°billion to date on support to Ukraine.
Taking pride tn our record
) We have created new defence industrial
) We have led the world in support ofpartnerships, including AUKUS to create
Ukraine against Putin’s aggression, as thethe world’s most advanced nuclearfirst European country to mobilise lethalpowered, conventionally and continually aid and to send Western tanks and long-armed, submarines and the Global Combat range missiles. Russia’s attempts to destroyAir Programme to create a new fighter jet
Ukraine are an assault on Europeanwith Italy and Japan.
security.
) Wewill always stand up for British values
) We will always be steadfast in our supportand interests and will never be afraid to act for our Trident nuclear deterrent and havewhen it is necessary. We have been part of invested in its modernisation, including aa Coalition that protected maritime security nuclear skills package worth up to £763from Houthi attacks and helped police the million by 2O3O. airspace of our partners in the Middle East.) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) }
Our strategic defence) Boosting the UK defence industrial base
© ekeby giving industry the multi-year certaint prioritiesoy oni yveY it requires to produce the equipment
We will adapt to the lessons from the warwe need when we need it, with at least in Ukraine which showed us it is vital to be£lO billion of investment in munitions able to replenish equipment quickly and thatproduction, the majority of which will be the acceleration of disruptive technologiesspent in the UK over the next decade. We is changing the character of warfare. Ourwill do this in the areas in which we have strategic priorities will be: the most pressing priorities, building on UK expertise. We will build long-term strategic partnerships with our industrial partners and invest in high quality British defence
Our pledge to Veteransindustry jobs across the UK.
We are proud to have created the United Kingdom's first) Accelerating the modernisation of our
Office for \ eterans Affairs, run by a dedicated MinisterArmed Forces and investing in technology who attends Cabinet, transforming what it feels like to be a.; that is advantageous on the modern
Veteran in the United Kingdom..
battlefield. Through our new Defence
) We will maintain the Office for Veterans Affairs in itsInnovation Agency, we will scale R&D current position in the Cabinet Office, with a dedicatedfunding to a minimum of 5% of the defence
Minister for Veterans Affairs in Cabinet. budget, together with an additional 2% to
) We will maintain the base operating budget of theexploit that R&D, accelerating investments
Office for Veterans Affairs at £lO million throughoutin new weapon systems.
the next Parliament. We will retain the National...
Insurance holiday for those who employ veterans and} Guaranteeing Ukraine the support it we will bring forward measures so that War Pensionsneeds for the long haul, assuring current and Armed Forces Compensation Scheme awards arelevels of support for as long as they are not counted as income for the purpose of benefits andrequired. We will secure additional military pensions. supplies for Ukraine and build international
) We will extend the visa fees waiver introduced toagreement to use immobilised Russian cover Commonwealth personnel, to include theirassets to support Ukraine.
direct dependants. We will fully implement the findings;;; of the independent review into Veterans UK. We willWe will deliver a National Defence and a.. Resilience Plan for our security, preparedness bring forward measures to ensure public bodies record. an.-. and resilience as a nation. This will be based whether someone has served in the Uk’s Armed Forces.; on the latest assessment of threats and risks,
)» We will cut the cost of the Veterans Railcard so that itbringing together defence and civilian planning costs the same as the HM Forces Railcard. to reflect our increasingly interdependent
) We will pass the Uk’s first ever Veterans’ Bill toworld, and sit alongside work to build on enshrine Veterans’ rights in law. Ensuring qualificationslearnings from Covid to improve the country’s from Service are correctly recognised in civilian life, preparedness for risks on the National Risk creating a legal duty on government to look after ourRegister.
Veterans and widening the scope of the Armed Forces_..
4,.-_oeWe will improve Service Family
Covenant in law to include the UK Government anda..... Accommodation, improving quality and devolved administrations.;-- ensuring military families get the support they
» We will change the law to ensure Veterans ID cards aredeserve.
valid identification in all future elections.) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) }
Improving efficiency anda oun ae ookinn and ctewaty needs
°°°o be outward-looking and global in investing across the Unitedperspective, seizing opportunities to deepen
Kingdomits economic ties and bolster its prosperity in the most dynamic parts of the world.
Defence already contributes significantly to our economic prosperity, supporting over 4OO, OOOWe have a record in standing up to those who jobs in the UK. As part of our new investmentthreaten our security and values, and we are in defence, we will prioritise growth in UKtaking new action to protect ourselves, our industries and supporting communitiesdemocracy and our economy at home.
across the United Kingdom.
We must be prepared to tackle the axis of
We will make sure new investment is spentauthoritarian states and hostile actors who more effectively than before. By delivering ourare working together to threaten international new Integrated Procurement Model, we willsecurity. That is why we will include Russia, make defence procurement faster, smarter and [ran and China within the enhanced tier of the more joined up, boost private sector investment -_ Foreign Influence Registration Scheme.
by confirming that ESG considerations are;....: ca:..) We will strengthen our relationships with entirely consistent with investment in our vital;; defence industry and transform innovation. like-minded partners around the world. As a permanent member of the UN Security
We will ensure we achieve value for moneyCouncil, the UK has a responsibility to from this investment in defence alongsidestand up for international peace and our procurement reforms. We will improvesecurity. We will keep investing in our productivity, along with a new target tocollective security through groups like the become the largest defence exporter inG7, Five Eyes and NATO.
Europe by 2O3O.
) We will maintain our special relationship eewith the United States, building on the
Leadership in the world; gent closer trading and national security ties we
Since the 2Ol9 election, the Conservativehave built in recent years.
Government has delivered on our promise to) Wewill seek to strengthen the make Britain a force for good in the world. Commonwealth, as an organisation
We are proud of our record in defence andthat accounts for over a quarter of the diplomacy in an increasingly contestedmembership of the UN and a champion of and dangerous world and we celebratevalues. We will deepen cooperation with the professionalism of our Armed Forces, Commonwealth partners and institutions diplomats, development experts andto enhance the benefits of membership, intelligence agencies. strengthen intra-Commonwealth trade,
Our highi..; hsupport members facing challenges ur ighest priority remains protecting thein attracting inward investment and
British homeland, Crown dependencies andi o. oo. strengthen the resilience of the most
Overseas Territories from risks and threats.;
As part of that, we continue to ensure thevulnerable members to climate change,; democratic rights of people in Gibraltar, thenature loss and environmental degradation.
Falklands and all our Overseas Territories are) We will build on our post-Brexit protected. relationships in Europe, including through the Joint Expeditionary Force and new) )) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) defensive treaties with Germany andThe UK will remain one of the largest
Poland, to match the treaty we have withdevelopment donors in the world. We will
France under Lancaster House. return to spending O.7% of GNI when fiscal circumstances allow. We will assess every
) Inrelation to China, we will strengthen ourpenny of this money with a strict national national security protections, align andinterest test.
cooperate with our partners, and engage...
where it is consistent with our interests.) We will continue to ensure that aid and
China has disregarded universal humandevelopment supports our strategic rights and its international commitments, objectives, with a focus on fragile States.
from Tibet and Xinjiang to Hong Kong. WeWe will work with our partners to deliver will continue to raise our grave concernsthe Sustainable Development Goals at the UN and other fora and use assetand tackle poverty, as set out in the freezes and travel bans on those involvedInternational Development White Paper.
under our human rights sanctions regime.) Wewill use our influence to ensure
) We will maintain our close ties in the Indo-Multilateral Development Banks get more
Pacific, following our accession to CPTPP, money to the countries who need it and our AUKUS partnership with Australia andwork to deliver debt relief.
ASEAN dialogue partner status. We will) We will expand our international campaigns bolster the Hiroshima Accord with Japanon girls’ education, women’s rights and and expand trade and security ties withreproductive health. We will stand up for
South Korea, Indonesia, Vietnam andthose persecuted for their faith and put the
Singapore. We will finalise a free tradeexisting role of Special Envoy for Freedom agreement with India, alongside a deeperof Religion or Belief on a statutory strategic partnership on technology andfooting. We will promote international defence. media freedom and work to end human
) We will continue to seek closer ties withtrafficking and modern slavery.
partners in the Gulf and Middle East based) We will support marginalised communities on an appreciation of regional perspectivesin the developing world and protect those and shared interests. persecuted for their ethnicity, political
) Wewill sign partnership agreements withviews, faith or sexuality. We will continue each of the British Overseas Territories, our campaigns against child marriage and ensuring we are working together toFGM.
deliver for their residents and identifying) Wewill scale up high impact, cost effective areas for greater cooperation on defence, global health interventions, including trade and investment. maternal nutrition and antimicrobial resistance, for benefit at home and overseas.
To ensure our world-class diplomacy andWe will continue our longstanding support development expertise is brought together wefor GAVI and the Global Fund - organisations will maintain the merger of the Foreign Officethat have saved millions of lives in the fight and former Department for International;.
Development - and use this advantage to theagainst disease.
maximum benefit in every post overseas. We will maintain the leadership on climate change we achieved at COP26 and our efforts to tackle global warming and biodiversity loss.))) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLDAGTION ) SECURE FUTURE )
We will continue to ring-fence our commitmenttwo-state solution in the Middle East - our to International Climate Finance. long-standing position has been that we will recognise a Palestinian State at a time that is
We will work with Small Island Developmentmost conducive to the peace process. We will
States, including our Commonwealth friendsredouble our efforts to help achieve diplomatic in the Caribbean and the Pacific, to accessbreakthroughs in Cyprus, Sri Lanka, Sudan and finance for climate change adaptation andMyanmar.
resilience.
We will bring back our Bill to ban public bodies
We will be confident in spreading British valuesfrom imposing their own boycott or divestment around the world, publishing a new Soft Powercampaigns against foreign countries and
Strategy to support the role of our embassiesterritories.
and the British Council overseas. We will support the BBC World Service, expand theWe will intensify our fight to stop money use of the English language worldwide andlaundering and dirty money and ensure champion English learning around the globe. all British Overseas Territories and Crown
Dependencies adopt open registers of
We will not apologise for standing up for ourbeneficial ownership.
values and we will work against the global rollback on people’s rights and freedoms. We will use all the tools available to us, including travel bans and sanctions, on individuals and entities that warrant it.
We have delivered on our manifesto pledge to introduce ‘votes for life’ for British citizens living overseas. We will appoint a Minister for British
Citizens Overseas to represent them across government.
The UK has a strong record of providing world-leading consular support to our citizens overseas and we will ensure British nationals abroad get help when they need it. We will introduce a new model for complex detention cases, with new Family Advocates to help provide specialist assistance and give greater confidence to families.
We are proud to be a problem-solving and burden-sharing nation. We will use our diplomatic efforts to keep pushing for reconciliation and stability in parts of the world where there is conflict or unresolved territorial disputes.
We staunchly stand behind Israel’s right to defend itself and to live with security. We will continue to support access to aid for those affected by the conflict. We will push for a
34Our plan to control immigration and stop illegal immigration
YY SECURE FUTURE),) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE )
)) Illegal migration is unfair. It) Crack down on organised immigration is unfair for people to jump thecrime, including through the National. Crime Agency and our intelligence queue In front of people whoservices, to disrupt supply chains and play by the rules. It is unfairtackle people smugglers.
for taxpayers to pay for the) Reform asylum rules, holding an hotels and public services. Andinternational summit and working with it is unfair for illegal migrantsother countries to reform international themselves who risk their lives inlaws to make them fit for an age of mass migration. We will restrict visa access from the hands of people smugglers. countries that don’t work with us on our
The Conservatives are the only party with a plannational priorities, like illegal migration.
to stop the boats and reduce the strain that illegal) Return people with no right to be here migration places on our communities and publicto their own country. We will sign further services. Labour have no plan and would grant anreturns deals like the one we have already amnesty to thousands of illegal migrants. agreed with Albania.
We have made progress. Last year, small boat) With control of our borders, we can do arrivals to the UK fell by a third. Our work withmore to help refugees fleeing persecution.
international partners prevented more thanIn addition to maintaining visa schemes for
26, OOO crossings last year. Our Albania deal..
shows that deterrence works, with numberspeople fleeing Hong Kong, Ukraine and our down 9O%. Afghan settlement schemes, we will give parliament control of how many places we
But the only way to stop the boats entirely isoffer on safe and legal routes to support to remove the incentive to come - by makingthose in genuine need from around the clear that if you come here illegally, you will notworld, with a cap based on the capacity of be allowed to stay. Only then will the boats stoplocal areas.
coming and people stop dying in the Channel.
“ewe. Delivering sustainable
) Establish a deterrent. We will runlevels of high-skilled a relentless, continual process ofmigration permanently removing illegal migrants to
Rwanda with a regular rhythm of flightsImmigration is too high. We want to attract every month, starting this July, until thethe brightest and best skilled migrants to the boats are stopped. If we are forced toUK to contribute to our businesses and public choose between our security and theservices. We must bring migration numbers jurisdiction of a foreign court, including thedown to sustainable levels to reduce the
ECtHR, we will always choose our security. impacts on public services and housing and to; restore public confidence in the system.
) End the legal merrygo-round. We will stop illegal migrants from bringing spuriousWe have already implemented changes which challenges to block their removal bymean that 3OO, OOO people who were eligible bringing our Illegal Migration Act into forceto come the UK last year now couldn’t. We and clearing the asylum backlog, with allhave:
claims processed in six months and the use of hotels ended.
36) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) }
) Ended the ability of almost allWe have taken steps to ensure those coming to international students and all carethe UK do not place a burden on the NHS, by workers to bring dependants. requiring them to pay the Immigration Health. Surcharge and increasing this to £l, O35. We
) Scrapped cut-price shortage labourwill go further, in line with other countries, from overseas, by abolishing the 2O%by requiring migrants to undergo a health going rate salary discount for shortagecheck in advance of travel and increasing their occupations. Immigration Health Surcharge or requiring them
) Stopped immigration from undercuttingto buy health insurance if they are likely to be a sae:: burden on the NHS.
British workers, by increasing the salary threshold for Skilled Worker visas by 48%We will increase all visa fees and remove the to £38,7OO. student discount to the Immigration Health
) Ensured those sponsoring dependantsSurcharge to raise more money for public.. sosservices.
can support them financially, by raising the minimum income for family visas toWe will continue to attract the brightest and
£38,7OO. best students to study in our world class. institutions. We will ensure those who come
Going forward, we will raise the Skilled Workerhere are able to integrate into communities threshold and Family income requirementand participate in the economy. We want with inflation automatically to make sure theyto make sure our immigration system is fair don’t undercut UK workers. and will continue delivering the Windrush
Compensation Scheme. We are committed to the EU Settled Status Scheme and the rights it has guaranteed for EU citizens.
The Conservative and Unionist Party Manifesto 2O24373, a -i a! 4E a 7- _i ae_; zaJ aeta4 eae: a
23i:
A -+
--7i a _- ~-a ed <iat
Ss --- -a eeee
- a7
- a.-_n ae:/ eea, a ss3aa eemc
Se oe -- ae: a
- "a ee -- ne:
e ee elee
- i ie; es ‘- a 7 iOur plan to deliver better health and social care cy) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE )
)) Since 2OlO, we have invested more in the NHS than at any other point in its history. We will continue to increase NHS spending above inflation in each year of the next
Parliament.
During Covid, we saw the NHS at its finest, with extraordinary acts of service and sacrifice from health and care professionals. Throughout the pandemic, the Conservative Government acted to save lives, protect the NHS and deliver a world leading vaccine programme. But dealing with a oncein-ageneration pandemic put a strain on our health and social care system and it has taken time to recover.
Thanks to record funding, we now haveWe will attract and retain a high-quality care more doctors and nurses than ever before, workforce, make reforms to shape the market delivering record numbers of appointments. for older people’s housing and support unpaid
We are committed to accelerating the NHS’scarers. We will implement our planned reforms recovery from the pandemic, delivering safe and _to cap social care costs from October 2O25.
effective services and ongoing improvements in waiting times for primary, elective, cancer andWe will invest in more and better facilities, emergency care. We will return performance tocontinuing to deliver 4O new hospitals by the levels set out in the NHS Constitution by the2O3O and investing proportionately more end of the next Parliament. in outof-hospital services over time. We will modernise NHS primary care services and bring
We will invest in and modernise the NHS. Wehealth and care closer to patients.
have taken the long-term decision to train the staff the NHS needs, by backing the NHS’s firstOur Dental Recovery Plan will unlock 2.5 ever Long-Term Workforce Plan. By the end ofmillion more NHS dental appointments, the next Parliament, there will be 92, OOO morethrough a patient premium to encourage dentists nurses and 28, OOO more doctors in the NHSto take on new NHS patients. We will make further than in 2O23. We are also delivering recordreforms to the dental contract to ensure its future increases in training places for other clinicians, sustainability and we will ensure newly qualified such as midwives and paramedics and wedentists have to work in the NHS for a number are boosting training places for dentists andof years or pay back their training costs. We will other dental care professionals by 4O%. We willpromote good oral health through our ‘Smile for improve working conditions for all NHS staff. Life’ programme. Rural and coastal communities will be better served through ‘golden hellos’ to
We are committed to supporting a high-qualityencourage dentists to work in these areas, and and sustainable social care system, buildingthrough new dental vans.
on our additional investment of up to £8.6 billion over the last two years. At the nextWe will further improve access to NHS services
Spending Review, we will give local authoritiesacross England by training more staff in rural a multi-year funding settlement to supportand coastal areas. For the first time the NHS social care and will take forward the reforms inConstitution will reflect the bespoke healthcare our ‘People at the Heart of Care’ White Paper. needs of rural and coastal communities and the need for the NHS to tailor services accordingly.
4O))) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION SECURE FUTURE ) }
We will protect and promote patients’ rightsecure more commercial clinical trials. We will to choose the NHS service that is right forremove bureaucratic obstacles to the use of new them. We will grow opportunities for all types ofmedicines, such as the NHS Budget Impact Test providers - NHS, charity or independent sector -and will align NHS England’s cost-effectiveness to offer services free of charge to NHS patients, thresholds for new medicines indications with where these meet NHS costs and standards. those used by NICE. We will implement a
We will extend patients’ right to choose to morenew medtech pathway so that cost-effective
NHS community services over time, includingmedtech, including Al, is rapidly adopted diagnostics, talking therapies and other mentalthroughout the NHS.
health services. We will fully roll out Martha’s
Rule, giving patients the right to a secondWe will cut waste and bureaucracy in the opinion. NHS, reducing the number of managers by 5,5OO, releasing £55O million for frontline
We will support our world-leading life sciences - services and simplifying and streamlining sector, embracing the opportunities providedoversight and accountability. We will carefully by Brexit to pursue nimble and agile regulation, consider the implications of the review of the supported by a well-equipped MHRA. We willwhistleblowing framework for the NHS and support research into new treatments, includingwe will consult on a disbarring regime for NHS for Parkinson’s and motor neurone disease andmanagers.
We know that, for most people, poor health; comes from living with one or more of six
Transforming NHSmajor health conditions: cancer, heart disease, emusculoskeletal disorders, mental ill-health, technology and productivitydementia and respiratory disease. We will publish a.-,; and implement a Major Conditions Strategy
We will invest £34 billion in new technology to transformto prevent these conditions from occurring the NHS for staff and for patients. The NHS Productivityand ensure those living with them receive the
Plan nals NI s productivity Brow by ne a “ ombest possible care. We will also take forward our
2O2526 un ocking £35 bi ron of cumulative savings byRare Diseases Action Plan. We will continue to the end of the decade. We will: modernise autism and learning disability services.
) Make the NHS App the single front door for NHS services. Patients will use the App to access their medicalWe will bring forward our landmark Tobacco records, order prescriptions, book vaccine appointments, and Vapes Bill in our first King’s Speech. We will access a digital red book and manage their hospitalcontinue to tackle childhood and adult obesity appointments. and will legislate to restrict the advertising of.;.. ee. products high in fat, salt and sugar. We will
) Use AI to free up doctors’ and nurses’ time for frontlinegather new evidence on the impact of ultraJPA nL teLeprocessed food to support people to make? Replace tens of thousands of outdated computers, healthier choices.
slashing the l3 million hours in doctors’ and nurses’ time lost to IT issues every year and digitise NHS processesWe will roll out new digital health checks to through the Federated Data Platform.25O, OOO more people every year, helping to, asenprevent hundreds of strokes and heart attacks.
» Fund technology to help clinicians read MRI and CTWe will take forward the NHS Vaccination scans more quickly and accurately, speeding up resultsStrategy.
for l3O, OOO patients every year.
¥ Create new incentives for improved performance, We are implementing the HIV Action Plan, which rewarding the best performing providers of care. will end new HIV transmissions by 2O3O. Subject to evaluation, we will expand HIV opt-out testing in emergency departments in England.
The Conservative and Unionist Party Manifesto 2O244l) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE )
We will prioritise women’s health, following; publication of the first ever Women’s HealthImproving mental health
Strategy in 2O22. To support women further, we willsupport
) Bring forward a comprehensiveMental health should have parity of esteem with physical national strategy for maternity care ashealth. To support children, young people and adults with recommended by the APPG on Birththeir mental health, we will:
Trauma’s inquiry.» Expand coverage of Mental Health Support Teams from
) Deliver additional funding for maternal5O% to lOO% of schools and colleges in England by 2O3O.
safety and improve access to mental» Open early support hubs for those aged ll25 in every health services for new mums, improvelocal community by 2O3O.
perinatal pelvic health services to prevent) Increase the planned expansion of NHS Talking and support women with birth injuriesTherapies by 5O%, supporting people with anxiety, and postnatal appointments dedicated tostress and depression.
checking mums, not just their babies.) Boost the capacity of Individual Placement and Support
) Expand women’s health hubs so that everyfor Severe Mental Illness by l4O, OOO places.
integrated care system has at least one hub) Pass a new law to provide better treatment and support up and running. for severe mental health needs in the first session of the
_; next Parliament.
) Roll out fracture liaison services to every region, reaching lOO% coverage by 2O3OWe will maintain the position that assisted dying is as osteoporosis disproportionately impactsa matter of conscience and will respect the will of women. Parliament. Debates on assisted dying should never
) Support continued research into disparities distract from the importance of delivering highin maternity care through the Nationalquality palliative care services and we will continue
Institute for Health and Care Research. to support children’s and adults’ hospices.
We will complete the implementation ofWe have made a wholehearted and unequivocal the Cass Review, protecting young peopleapology, on behalf of successive governments questioning their gender from ideologicallyof all parties, for the infected blood scandal. As driven care and ensuring that NHS servicesone of the last acts of Parliament, legislation was follow evidence-based best practice. We havepassed that brings the Infected Blood Compensation already stopped the routine use by the NHS ofAuthority into existence and we confirmed Sir puberty blockers for gender dysphoria and willRobert Francis as its Interim Chair. We will pay legislate to permanently prevent their privatecomprehensive compensation to those infected prescription and supply. and those affected by this scandal, accepting the principles recommended by the Inquiry. Whatever
We will amend the NHS Constitution so thatit costs to deliver the scheme, we will pay it. We it recognises every patient’s right to requestwill also give a further £2lO, OOO interim payment single-sex accommodation and same-sexto living infected beneficiaries - those registered intimate care. We will not allow the wordwith existing infected blood support schemes as
‘woman’ to be erased by health services. Wordswell as those who register with a support scheme such as ‘breastfeeding’ and ‘mother’ will not bebefore the final scheme becomes operational and replaced by ‘chestfeeding’ and ‘birthing parent’. the estates of those who pass away between now and payments being made. A scandal like this must
We will introduce a new licensing schemenever be allowed to happen again, so we will study and age limits for non-surgical cosmeticthe Inquiry’s wide-ranging recommendations and procedures, ensuring services are administeredprovide a full response to the Inquiry.
by suitably qualified and trained professionals. Our plan for safer streets and justice for victims of crime
) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE )
)) The Conservatives will alwaysArena terrorist attack in 2Ol7. This will ensure.. premises are better prepared for terrorist back our brave police and securityattacks by requiring them to take proportionate services with the powers andsteps to mitigate risks.
resources needed to keep our. We will toughen up community sentencing by country safe and we will alwaysincreasing the use of community payback work to deliver a justice system that and electronic tagging, so criminals pay their is fair to victims and sees offendersdebt to society and communities witness justice.. being served. We will fund every police force repay their debt to society. to roll out Hotspot Policing, which has cut
Under the Conservatives, violent crime has fallenanti-social behaviour by up to 5O% in some by 44% since 2OlO and neighbourhood crimeareas.
is down 48%. Reoffending has fallen from overWe will keep turning the tide against fraudsters.
3O% in 2OlO to 25%. We have recruited 2O, OOOIn the last year we have reduced fraud by l3%, police officers, delivered 6, OOO prison placesincluding through our new National Fraud as part of the largest prison expansion since theSquad with 4OO officers now in post. We will
Victorian era and deported over l8, OOO foreignban SIM farms, which are used to send bulk national offenders since 2Ol9 alone. We will: messages for fraudulent texts, and ban cold
) Give every neighbourhood an additionalcalls on financial products so fraudsters cannot police officer by recruiting 8, OOO moredupe people into buying fake investments.
police officers to patrol communities and catch criminals in every ward in the country. Tackling violence against
These full time, fully warranted officers willwomen and girls be dedicated to neighbourhood policing..-_. We have made violence against women and
) Back the police, by giving officers newgirls a strategic policing requirement for the powers and tools to catch criminals, includingfirst time, making clear to the police that these technology like facial recognition and powerscrimes are as significant as terrorism, serious to seize knives and track down stolenand organised crime and child sexual abuse.
property. We will always back the police in the lawful and professional use of force, alongside We have strengthened the law to punish a fair and proportionate accountability system. Predators with new offences for stalking, controlling or coercive behaviour, non-fatal
) Restore public trust in policing. We willstrangulation and suffocation, sharing of intimate license police officers for specialist roles, images or ‘revenge porn’, non-consensual as we do already for firearms officers. taking of images of a woman breastfeeding,
We will legislate to ensure officers are‘up skirting’ and raised the maximum penalties appropriately vetted during their servicefor harassment. We will legislate to create new and those who fail can be sacked. offences for spiking, the creation of sexualised deepfake images and taking intimate images
We will foster greater collaboration betweenwithout consent.
the National Crime Agency and Counter
Terrorism Policing. We will support victims of domestic abuse including through our Domestic Abuse Act,
We will urgently introduce Martyn’s Law, which created a statutory definition of domestic in tribute to Martyn Hett, who was tragicallyabuse and gave new powers to police and the killed alongside 2l others in the Manchestercourts.
44) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) }
We will toughen sentencing for murders that takemeasures to crack down on hyper-prolific place within the context of domestic abuse withoffenders.
new aggravating factors, such as if they involve.
coercive and controlling behaviour or gratuitousWe will empower judges to require offenders attacks. We will introduce a 25year prison termto attend hearings or face an increased for domestic murders, regardless of whether asentence. We will stand firmly behind the legal weapon is used. Those who kill their domesticdoctrine of joint enterprise meaning that those abusers will not face the same starting point. Thiswho assist in crimes, from the getaway driver to will be accompanied by a review of homicidethe weapon supplier, can be held accountable.
ing, looking to clIholes that..; nena ere. im on ShyWe will build four new prisons, completing ggi. our programme of 2O, OOO new prison places
We will introduce an aggravating factor forby 2O3O. We will make it easier to build prisons murders that happen in the context of ‘rough -! appropriate places by scrapping legacy EU sex’, so it is never used as an excuse to get arules and streamlining the planning system.
lighter sentence...
gWe will remove more Foreign National
We have increased rape prosecutions by 56%Offenders by increasing removals under the since 2OlO and we will ensure rape victims getEarly Removal Scheme and negotiating more the justice and support they deserve, withPrisoner Transfer Agreements.
investigatory m I for rape for police a new investigatory model for rape for pollWe will maintain the ban on prisoners voting forces and prosecutors and pre-recorded cross-from iail examination for victims in all Crown courts. jan.
We will carefully consider the recommendationsWe will turn criminals away from the cyc e of Baroness Bertin’s Independent Review ofof reoffending, investing in rehabilitative
Pornography and ensure we have the rightservices such as drug treatment, education and safeguards in place to protect against anyemployment. We will deliver our ten-year drugs harmful impacts of the industrplan to cut crime and help people rebuild their
Pylives away from crime.
A justice system thatOur Victims and Prisoners Act ensures victims blithose affected by major disasters such as publicHillsborough, the Manchester Arena bombing
We will toughen sentencing for the worstand the Grenfell Tower fire can get the help, they need, when they need it, through a offenders. We have already ended Labour’sermanent Independent Public Advocate automatic halfway release for violent andP. P_;:... We will expand the provision of legal aid at serious sexual offenders. We will make life. oo, imprisonment without parole mandatoryinquests related to major incidents where the for more of the most heinous murderersIndependent Public Advocate is appointed or in... the aftermath of terrorist incidents.
and require rapists and other serious sexual offenders to spend the whole of theirWe will bring the mandatory reporting sentences behind bars. provisions of the Criminal Justice Bill into force
We will toughen sentences for knife crimeas soon as possible. We will design a redress rooming gangs and assaults against retailscheme for the victims of child sexual abuse in ane combat the ability of seriousinstitutional settings that reflects their needs... yWe will ensure this includes the victims of organised crime gangs to use new technology to harm the public. We will prioritise further
The Conservative and Unionist Party Manifesto 2O2445))) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLDAGTION.) SECURE FUTURE )) grooming gangs and make a national apology6OO Just Stop Oil and Extinction Rebellion to grooming gang victims. protestors in London alone. We will introduce further powers to ban face coverings,
We will ensure sex offenders cannot evadepyrotechnics and climbing on war memorials.
justice or conceal their identity by restricting sex offenders from changing their names. We will strengthen police powers to prevent protests or marches that pose a risk of
We will cut the Covid court backlog byserious disorder, by allowing police to take keeping open Nightingale courtrooms, fundinginto account the cumulative impact of protests.
sitting days and investing in court maintenance. We will ban protests outside schools to stop
And we will continue to digitise court processesmobs from intimidating teachers and children.
and expand the use of remote hearings. WeWe will always support teachers to uphold will match fund lOO criminal law pupillages toand promote fundamental British values and speed up justice for victims and will continueensure they are protected from accusations of to ensure access to justice through legal aidblasphemy.
provision.
We will place a duty on the police and
We will expand our Pathfinder Courts pilotprosecutors to publish regular guidance on the in family court proceedings and continuestatements, chants or symbols, for example, mediation vouchers to help more familiesthe swastika or the term ‘jihad’, that in the resolve private law child arrangements withoutcontext of political protest may constitute an an acrimonious court battle. offence. We will explore ways for the police to.. recover some of the costs of policing disruptive
We will support our world class legal servicesprotests from the groups that organise them.
sector, including through an Arbitration Bill.
We will help individuals and small businessesWe will also ensure our elected bring cases against wealthier opponents withrepresentatives get the protection needed to legislation to support third party funding ofrepresent their constituents without fear.
litigation.
Abuse or discrimination based on religion is
A plan to counter extremism unacceptable. We will not tolerate antisemitic hatred in any form. We have pledged £54 and to protect our streetsmillion for the Community Security Trust to give. Jewish schools and synagogues the security
In recent months we have seen shockingmeasures they need and allocated additional
Increases in protests being used as a cover forfunding to support schools and universities to extremist disruption and criminality. We cannotunderstand, recognise and tackle antisemitism.
allow a small and vocal minority to destroy ourWe will get the UK Holocaust Memorial built.
democratic values. That is why we unveiled a new extremism definition under which certainWe do not tolerate anti-Muslim hatred and groups that promote an ideology based onwill seek to stamp it out wherever it occurs.
violence, hatred or intolerance will be blockedWe have committed to provide £ll7 million from government funding and meeting officials. yer four years for the Protective Security for
We have passed tough new laws to curbhelp fund so awne are Pro to support and disruptive protests. Our Public Order Act
2O23 gave the police new powers to intervene where protests cause serious disruption to communities, leading to the arrests of over
46Our plan for an affordable and pragmatic transition to net zero) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION } SECURE FUTURE ) ]
)) In the last few years, we haveto provide energy to nomes and Dusinesses; across the country and protect high-skilled an faced the greatest shock to ourwell-paid jobs in the industry.
energy security since the l97Os.
Putin’s illegal invasion of UkraineLabour are committed to shutting down the... North Sea, rejecting any new licenses. That sent energy prices spiralling. would put 2OO, OOO jobs and billions of pounds
Because of the decisions weof tax receipts at risk. It would leave the UK had taken to boost domesticmore dependent on foreign powers and mean energy production and investhigher emissions from imported liquefied gas.
in renewables, Britain had littleWe introduced a windfall tax on oil and gas reliance on Russian fuel when thecompanies in 2O22 to ensure they pay their... fair share of tax from extraordinary profits while
Invasion began, unlike some of ourprices remain abnormally high. We will keep
European neighbours. But whenthis in place until 2O2829, unless prices fall
*. back to normal sooner. In total, this is expected lobal enerrices spiked, the ggyPP, to raise over £26 billion. We will maintain the
Government stepped in to payinvestment allowances that provide incentives around half the typical householdto invest in our North Sea, which Labour have bill at the peak, saving familiessaid they would remove.
£l,5OO on average. Bills are nowWe will back up renewables and prevent the coming down, and in July will fall to prospect of blackouts with new gas power the lowest level in over two years. stations to maintain a safe and reliable energy. source for days when the weather doesn’t
But the shock has reminded uspower up renewables. Conservatives know of the importance of securing ourthat if we are forced to choose between clean d keeping citizens safe and warm, we long-term energy supply. energy an ggyPPlywill choose to keep the lights on.
We are proud of our record and remainW. delivering record investment into committed to delivering net zero by 2O5O. Todaye are deivering Tecord inves.: UK renewables. But we need to go further, the UK is home to the five largest offshorelocki. ttt:
wind farms in the world. Half of our electricityUNTOCKING on het Nae i, ene i.
comes from renewables, compared to justPortion ee nk © tuture. nme nex
7% when Labour were last in office. We haveanrament we wil reduced emissions further and faster than any) Treble our offshore wind capacity, to of our competitors and the UK is the first majordeliver low-cost, home-grown energy economy to get halfway to net zero. And weand support the development of vibrant have done this while growing our economyindustrial clusters in places like the North by 8O%, demonstrating to other countries thatEast of En gland, Scotland and Wales.
there is a positive economic path to tackling climate change.) Build the first two carbon capture and storage clusters, based across North e ee Wal, the North West of England and
Delivering energy securityales and, the North West of England an
Teesside and the Humber, cutting carbon
We will boost our energy independence in anand creating tens of thousands of jobs in increasingly unstable world. We will legislatethese regions, and progress the second to ensure annual licensing rounds for oiltranche of projects in Aberdeenshire and and gas production from our own North Seathe Humber.
48) )) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE )
) Invest £l4 billion into the Green Industriessubsidised by foreign governments and helped
Growth Accelerator to support Britishpublic projects procure more UKmade steel.
manufacturing capabilities, boost supplyWe agreed a £5OO million grant as part of chains and ensure our energy transition isa £l.25 billion commitment by Tata Steel to made in Britain. transform and secure a sustainable future at their Port Talbot works. We will continue
) Scale up nuclear power, building on ourworking to support production in Scunthorpe work establishing Great British Nuclear. and the North East of England, securing the
Within the first lOO days of the nextfuture of steelmaking across the UK.
Parliament, we will approve two new fleets_...
of Small Modular Reactors to rapidlyWe will implement a new import carbon pricing
Fmechanism by 2O27 to ensure that imports of expand nuclear power, create well-paid,:-_:..,. iron, steel, aluminium, ceramics and cement from high-skilled jobs and deliver cheaper,; countries with a lower or no carbon price will cleaner and more secure energy. We willface a comparable carbon price to those goods halve the time it takes for new nuclearproduced in the UK. This will reduce the risk of reactors to be approved, by allowingindustry being displaced to other countries which regulators to assess projects while designs aren't taking action on climate change.
are being finalised, improving joinup with overseas regulators assessing the sameA pragmatic and technology and speeding up planning andeht environmental approvals. proportionate approac ° net zero
) Deliver a new gigawatt power plant at Wylfa in North Wales and work withThe UK has led the world on tackling climate industry to deliver existing projects atchange, having cut our emissions more than any
Hinkley Point and Sizewell. other major economy. We will get to net zero on the fairest possible path and in a way that brings
This will help the UK to become a net exporter - people with us.
of electricity. And by building more electricity links with neighbouring countries, we canWe will seize the opportunities created by the increase exports, make our energy systemtransition, opening up whole new sectors and more efficient and bring additional revenue tocreating hundreds of thousands of good jobs the UK. We will ensure offshore cables helpin all corners of the country. Our approach reduce the amount of onshore infrastructure, leverages the innovation and investment of such as substations, that we need to build. the private sector to unleash technologies that cut costs for households. This has enabled
As we achieve this transition to net zero, weus to overachieve on our targets, become a will take steps to ensure the technology andpowerhouse in clean technologies, and continue infrastructure is made here in the UK. We willto support households. We reject Labour’s provide a bonus, on top of contract paymentsdogmatic, top-down approach that will burden that support offshore wind, to reward energyhouseholds with higher bills.
firms that invest in manufacturing in the most disadvantaged places in the UK orWe will cut the cost of tackling climate invest in more sustainable supply chains, change for households and business, and creating more good jobs as we get moredeliver net zero by 2O5O, by:
energy from renewables.) Sticking to our pragmatic, proportionate
We are strong supporters of domestic steeland realistic approach that eases the production and have introduced effectiveburdens on working people. Ensuring that safeguards against steel that is heavily) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) } families are given time to make changes) Introducing more efficient local markets for that affect their lives and never forcingelectricity, which expert analysis estimates people to rip out their existing boiler andwould save £2O - £45 per household per replace it with a heat pump. year.
) Guaranteeing a vote in the next Parliament) Giving households the choice of smart on the next stage of our pathway, withenergy tariffs, which can save them £9OO a adoption of any new target accompaniedyear.
by proper consideration of the plans and) Implementing the recommendations of the policies required to meet the target, to:::
_: for the biWinser Review, ensuring networks are able maintain democratic consent or the bigto buy forward with confidence and cutting decisions that net zero will mean for ourwaiting times to get a grid connection to country. deliver an estimated saving of £l5 - £25 per
) Ensuring that green levies on householdhousehold per year out to 2O35.
bills are lower. The cost of renewablesoe.;) Recognising technological developments such as wind and solar has fallenover the last decade, we will undertake dramatically. We will ensure the annual..;: a rapid review into the advantages of policy costs and levies on household:::; alternative network technologies, compared energy bills are lower in each year of theto overhead pylons. The review will consider next Parliament than they were in 2O23.. oo moving to a presumption in favour of
) Reforming the Climate Change Committee, undergrounding where cost competitive.
giving it an explicit mandate to consider cost to households and UK energy securityAlmost half of homes in England are now energy. F. efficiency Band C, up from just one in seven in in its future climate advice.-an.
2OlO. We will invest £6 billion in energy efficiency
) Ruling out creating further green levies, over the next three years to make around a and alongside our commitment not tomillion homes warmer. And we will fund an introduce road pricing schemes, we willenergy efficiency voucher scheme, open to every also rule out any frequent flyer levy. household in England, to support the installation of energy efficiency measures and solar panels,
Energy bills are falling, down 63% since thehelping families lower their bills.
peak. We will take further action to ensure they are low as possible for families, by: We will ensure democratic consent for onshore oo.. wind, striking the right balance between energy
) Maintaining our energy price cap, security and the views of their local communities.
protecting millions of households fromOur updated National Planning Policy Framework being overcharged by their supplier. Asseeks to ensure local areas that host onshore the energy market advances, the pricewind directly benefit, including potentially through cap will need to evolve and we will ensureenergy bill discounts.
the regulator has the necessary powers to;;.
continue protecting consumers. We will support solar in the right places, not on our best agricultural land. We have changed
} Reviewing and reforming standingplanning rules to protect the best agricultural charges to keep them as low as possible. land with a presumption that this is used for food
) Delivering our Pumpwatch scheme thatproduction, while also making it easier for solar to.;. be located on brownfield sites and on rooftops.
will force petrol retailers to share live...._:. Our new planning rules also prevent multiple solar information on their prices, helping driversfarms being clustered in one area to help protect to get a fair price at the pump. our rural landscapes. We will retain the current moratorium on fracking. Our plan to build more houses in the right places) )) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) }
)) We will deliver a secure future) Unlocking new urban regeneration for communities by giving moreschemes, by creating locally-led urban tedevelopment corporations in partnership people a better chance of livingwith the private sector and institutional where they would like - near theirinvestors. We will support the delivery of family, friends and job. We havenew quarters in Leeds, Liverpool and York delivered over 2.5 million homesalongside working with local leaders and the community to seize the opportunity of since 2OlO, including meeting ourour ambitious Cambridge 2O5O plan.
commitment to deliver one million) Supporting local and smaller builders homes in the last Parliament. Homeby requiring councils to set land aside ownership rates plummeted underfor them and lifting Section lO6 burdens the last Labour Government so weon more smaller sites, while ruling out cannot afford to go back to squareLabour’s proposed ‘community right to one. We will deliver l.6 millionappeal’ which would bring the planning.. system to its knees.
homes in England in the next
Parliament by:) Making sure local authorities use the new Infrastructure Levy to deliver the
) Abolishing the legacy EU ‘nutrientGP surgeries, roads and other local neutrality’ rules to immediately unlock theinfrastructure needed to support homes.
building of lOO, OOO new homes with localWe will not allow these funds to be spent consent, with developers required in law toon community projects that bear no pay a one-off mitigation fee so there is norelation to support for new homes.
net additional pollution..
) Renewing the Affordable Homes
) Delivering a record number of homesProgramme that will deliver homes of all each year on brownfield land in urbantenures and focus on regenerating and areas. We will do this by providing a fast-improving housing estates.
track route through the planning system.;; for new homes on previously developed) Retaining our cast-iron commitment to land in the 2O largest cities. Strong designprotect the Green Belt from uncontrolled codes will ensure this enables the gentledevelopment, while ensuring more homes densification of urban areas, with newget built where it makes sense, like in inner family homes and mansion-blocks on tree-cities. Our national planning protections lined streets built in the local character. Wemean there is never any top-down will look at extending ‘full expensing’ to therequirement for councils to remove Green delivery of brownfield housing. Belt protection and these will remain in place.
) Raising density levels in inner London to those of European cities like Paris and
Barcelona. We will ensure the London
Plan delivers more family homes a year, forcing the Mayor to plan for more homes on brownfield sites, like underused industrial land. We will regenerate major sites like Euston, Old Oak Common and
Thamesmead.) )) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) }
A plan to support first-timeTo eet support homeowners, we will eintroduce a two-year temporary Capital buyers onto the housingGains Tax relief for landlords who sell to ladder and ensure fairnesstheir existing tenants. We rule out Labour’s in our housing systemanti-aspiration move to drastically reduce Right to Buy discounts to levels seen under the last
As well as building the homes we need, weLabour Government. We will protect the laws will also take immediate steps to support morethat ensure the discounts rise with inflation and people onto the housing ladder. We will ensure -_ fight any plan by local authorities to abolish the the majority of first-time buyers pay no StampRight to Buy altogether.
Duty at all, lowering the upfront costs of buying a first home. We will make permanent theWe will complete the process of leasehold increase to the threshold at which first-timereform, to improve the lives of over four buyers pay Stamp Duty to £425, OOO frommillion leaseholders. We will cap ground
£3OO, OOO, which we introduced in 2O22. Werents at £25O, reducing them to peppercorn will also launch a new and improved Help toover time. We will end the misuse of forfeiture
Buy scheme to provide first-time buyers withso leaseholders don’t lose their property and an equity loan of up to 2O% towards the costcapital unfairly and make it easier to take up of a new build home. First-time buyers will becommonhold.
able to get onto the housing ladder with a 5% deposit on interest terms they can afford. TheWe will pass a Renters Reform Bill that will scheme will be part funded by contributionsdeliver fairness in the rental market for from house builders. We will also continuelandlords and renters alike. We will deliver the our Mortgage Guarantee Scheme, which hascourt reforms necessary to fully abolish Section already helped over 4O, OOO households buy2l and strengthen other grounds for landlords a home, while supporting more families to buyto evict private tenants guilty of anti-social through shared ownership. behaviour.
We will always prioritise giving those who workWe will continue with our plans to end rough hard and contribute to our country a leg up insleeping and prevent people from ending up the housing market. We will legislate for newon the streets in the first place, after making
‘Local Connection’ and ‘UK Connection’significant progress over the last few years. We tests for social housing in England, to ensurewill deliver our commitments under the Local this valuable but limited resource is allocatedAuthority Housing Fund and review the quality fairly. And we will implement a ‘three strikesof temporary accommodation.
and you're out’ expectation of social housingAfter delivering landmark new laws that freed landlords for anti-social behaviour. They will be..... leaseholders from cladding bills following on expected to evict tenants whose behaviour... from the awful tragedy of Grenfell Tower, we 's disruptive to neighbours and the localwill continue our support for leaseholders community. affected by historic building safety problems
We will protect family homes from higher tax. by requiring the continuation of developerUnder the Family Home Tax Guarantee, wefunded remediation programmes for mid- and will not increase the number of council taxhigh-rise buildings.
bands, undertake an expensive council taxWe will ensure councils have the powers they revaluation or cut council tax discounts, asneed to manage the uncontrolled growth of
Labour is currently doing in Wales. We will...,.., holiday lets, which can cause nuisance to local maintain Private Residence Relief so that.. ue. residents and a hollowing out of communities.
people’s homes are protected from Capital
Gains Tax and we will not increase the rate or level of Stamp Duty to support homeowners.
The Conservative and Unionist Party Manifesto 2O2453) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE )
We will support those who want to build or commission their own home by making the planning process simpler, while also supporting more community housing schemes. We will encourage the building of different forms of housing, particularly housing for older people.
Building on our new powers for the police, we will further speed up the use and enforcement of powers to remove illegal traveller sites, while giving councils greater planning powers to prevent unauthorised development by travellers.
54Our plan to strengthen communities
)) EARL
‘yes) )) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) ]
)) Our commitment to levellinginvolve funding community groups focused up means giving everyone theon increasing life chances, instilling civic. pride and boosting people’s skills.
opportunity to stay local and go; far. Conservatives are committed) Create more Freeports and Business.. iRates Retention zones. Freeports have to delivering stronger communitiesalready generated just under £3 billion and safer streets, unleashing thein investment, which in turn will create power of the private sector tothousands of jobs. We will extend this unlock jobs and opportunity foropportunity to more areas and set out an.. application round in the next Parliament.
all and boosting local pride. WeW;. e want to replicate the example of have already allocated and willSunderland’s Crown Works Studios ensure we deliver over £l5 billionelsewhere in the country. We will enable in dedicated levelling up fundingcouncils to retain all business rates growth across the UK since 2Ol9 andwithin a defined zone for 25 years, which. they can use to finance the delivery of new passed our landmark Levellinginfrastructure and invest in supporting
Up and Regeneration Act. Weburgeoning local industries.
have saved more than 33O pubs,) Continue backing Investment Zones across sports clubs, arts venues andthe country, giving areas £l6O million to other precious community spacescatalyse local growth and investment.
through our Community Ownership __) Give our high streets a new lease of
Fund and we have unlocked thelife and restore pride in place. We will promise of thousands of jobs withchange planning laws to support places l2 Freeports. To further strengthento bring back local market days and... regenerate defunct shopping centres.
communities, we will: We will continue to make industry pay for
) Provide lO5 towns in the UK with a £2Oremoving chewing-gum from streets and million endowment fund for local people toraise the fines utility firms must pay when change their town’s future. This includesthey create ‘street scars’ by not properly extending our plan to 3O more towns whorestoring roads and pavements after their will benefit from funding that they can useworks are completed. We will make fly on their priorities such as reviving hightipping an offence that carries penalty streets or bringing new housing to townpoints against your driving licence.
centres.) Empower communities through devolution
) Extend our Community Ownership Fund toand new powers. By 2O3O, every part help more communities across the UK takeof England that wants one will have a control of vital community assets like pubs, devolution deal. We will offer our ‘level 4’ music venues, libraries, green spaces, devolution powers to areas in England with leisure centres and more. a devolution deal and a directly elected. leader, starting with the Tees Valley.
) Extend the UK Shared Prosperity Fund for three years at the next Spending Review,) Launch a Seaside Heritage Fund to support before using this funding to support UKenhancements to our seaside heritage, wide National Service. Both schemes willpreserving and restoring our coastal assets.
56) )) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE )
We will ensure councils provide high qualityA plan to support the journeys and value for money services to local communities. As part of this, we will protectpeople make every day residents from excessive council tax rises byReliable transport links are critical for thriving ensuring that local people have the final saylocal communities. The £36 billion of savings on councll tax, and we will ban the ‘four-dayfrom HS2 will transform local and regional working week’ in local authorities. We willtransport, benefitting more people, in more improve standards in councils by making theirplaces, more quickly. But we will also take performance more transparent through theimmediate steps to help people now. Buses
Office for Local Government. We will alwaysare overwhelmingly the most popular form of stand behind councils and look to recognisepublic transport, in both urban and rural areas.
the unique circumstances of coastal areasOur £2 bus fare has cut bus fares outside in the allocation of grant funding to localLondon by 6.2%. We will extend the £2 bus authorities, alongside providing fairer fundingfare cap in England for the entirety of the for rural areas through the Rural Servicesnext Parliament, benefitting young people
Delivery Grant. and low-income households while pensioners continue to benefit from the free bus pass. The extension of the £2 fare cap will be funded by savings from reform of the railway which will save up to £l.5 billion annually.
Too often over the last few years, local Labour politicians have made the journeys on which people rely harder. We are determined to turn this situation around. Since 2OlO, the
Conservative Government has consistently been on the side of drivers. We have prioritised freezes in Fuel Duty and recently published our ‘Plan for Drivers’ including reforms to make better use of bus lanes, introduce penalties for overrunning street works and implement a consistent approach to the enforcement of entering yellow box junctions. Following the recent consultation, we will allow motorcycles in all bus lanes and reform motorcycle licensing.
We will roll out the National Parking Platform this year to simplify paying for parking.
Reflecting feedback from older and disabled people, we will also give councils the power to ban pavement parking, provided they engage with businesses and residents to ensure they are not adversely affected.
We remain steadfastly committed to road safety and, to that end, will maintain our pledge to build no new smart motorways and invest in improving the safety of existing ones.
The Conservative and Unionist Party Manifesto 2O2457) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) } irst passenger railway in theand we areeee the only party with a credible plan for railinstitutions reform. Labour’s incoherent and ideologicalThe Conservative Party will always protect nationalisation plan would put the trade unionsour national heritage - including statues in charge, continuing to prolong unaffordablemonuments and memorials. We will keep, and vet wong re which areour ‘retain and explain’ guidance under unjUsuTadle to Tne Public. review to ensure it Supports custodians in
We will introduce a Rail Reform Bill in our firstthe preservation of our national history and
King’s Speech to create Great British Railwaysheritage. We will continue to support museums
(GBR), headquartered in Derby. GBR will usherand libraries across the country. Government in a revitalised private-public partnership, has the power to leverage philanthropy for delivering a modern and innovative railway withgood causes and cultural institutions. We will reliable services, and simpler tickets. We willwork with individuals, businesses, charities and task GBR with growing the role of the privateother networks to find opportunities to unleash sector, including supporting the expansion ofthis even further. We will complete the review open access services to bring greater choiceof Gift Aid within the next Parliament.
for passengers. We will also look to include IWe will ensure Royal Mail continues to deliver measures to reform outdated working practicesthe universal postal service in a way which in the rail industry in the Rail Reform Bill. is affordable for customers as well as being
Over the next Parliament. we will also rollefficient and financially sustainable. Saturday out mobile pay as you go contactless ticketsdeliveries are important, particularly to; nationwide, bringing rail into line with how webusinesses, which is why we are Clear they will pay for many goods and servicesnot be scrapped. Conservatives are clear we want a continued six-day service, which Labour
We will work with Active Travel England toand the trade unions would put at risk.
make it safer for people to walk or cycle,; including projects like ensuring safe walkingwe have taken exceptional and unprecedented routes to schools and measures to protectaction, legislating to quash the convictions pedestrians, cyclists and other vulnerableof those affected by the Post Office Horizon road users. Where new schemes arescandal, one of the greatest miscarriages of introduced, we will ensure they have localjustice in our nation’s history. We will ensure support first. While we back responsiblethe new redress scheme is in place and ready cyclists, we will bring penalties for the rareto make payments to claimants by the end of instances where dangerous cyclists kill orJuly. We are clear that the Post Office should injure into line with those for other road users. bea valuable social and economic asset for communities and businesses for years to come.
That requires a change of culture at the top to deliver the scale of change needed across the organisation.
We have legislated to require banks and building societies considering closing a branch to consider the needs of all their customers and ensure they continue to have appropriate access to cash in their local community. We have already announced over lOO Banking
Hubs which enable customers to access free to
58) )) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) use cash and everyday banking services. will have a right to know if their child wants to be treated as the opposite sex and schools
We remain steadfast in our support for thewill have to involve parents when it comes to fundamental principles that underpin thedecisions about their children.
UK’s constitutional settlement. We remain committed to the First Past the Post system forWe are clear that no one in this country should elections, maintaining the direct link with thebe harmed or harassed for who they are. That local voter. We will not change the voting ageis why we are proud that the UK has one of from l8. We will maintain rules to tackle votingthe world’s strongest legislative frameworks fraud, including the requirement to show ID. to prevent and tackle discrimination and harassment against those with particular
Our plan for greaterprotected characteristics, including sexual protections around sex andorientation and gender reassignment. Attempts genderat socalled ‘conversion therapy’ are abhorrent.
But legislation around conversion practices
Biological sex is a reality. The overwhelmingis a very complex issue, with existing criminal majority of people in this country recogniselaw already offering robust protections. The that. It is right that we have in place provisionschallenges involved can be seen, for example, and protections for those whose sense of selfwith the SNP reconsulting for views on their does not match their biological sex. However, proposals in Scotland and Sweden recently we will not allow the safety and privacy ofconcluding that they will not be pursuing a women and girls to be undermined. similar ban. In light of the Cass Review Final
Report, it is right that we take more time before
It has been more than a decade sincereaching a final judgement on additional the Equality Act was passed by a Labourlegislation in this area.
Government. It has not kept pace with evolving..
interpretations and is not sufficiently clearEquality of opportunity on when it means sex and when it means gender. The next Conservative GovernmentWe are committed to promoting equality of will introduce primary legislation to clarifyopportunity, not divisive identity politics. We that the protected characteristic of sexvalue a society that is inclusive no matter what in the Equality Act means biological sex. sex, sexual orientation, ethnicity or religion a
This will guarantee that single sex servicesperson is. Our United Kingdom is a multiand single sex spaces can be provided, forethnic, multi-racial, multi-faith success story.
example in healthcare and sports settings, toOur Inclusive Britain plan advances opportunity ensure women and girls are protected. We arewhile tackling unfair ethnic disparities across clear that on fundamental matters of personaleducation, employment, health and the justice identity there should be one approach acrosssystem. We are seeing some of the most the country, so we will also legislate so that anentrenched disparities in our society narrowing, individual can only have one sex in the eyesfor example in our justice system and our police of the law in the United Kingdom. forces, we now have the highest proportion of ethnic minority officers, judges and magistrates
In recent years, an increasing number ofsince records began.
children have started questioning their gender, the consequences of which are still unknown. Our ambition is to make this country the most
This is why we will pass legislation to ensureaccessible place in the world for people schools must follow our guidance for teacherswith disabilities to live, work and thrive. We on how best to support gender questioningare delivering on our Disability Action Plan students in schools and colleges. Parentsto transform the everyday lives of people
The Conservative and Unionist Party Manifesto 2O2459) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) with disabilities. We passed the British Sign
Language Act to ensure all public services and information are accessible to Deaf people who use BSL. The Down Syndrome Act will improve access to services and the quality of life of people with Down’s syndrome. In the next
Parliament we will improve support for people who have guide or assistance dogs and explore bidding to host and deliver the 2O3l Special
Olympics World Summer Games.
We are proud of our record on delivering for
LGBT people and will continue to do so. We passed the Same Sex Marriage Act to give same-sex couples the opportunity to enjoy the institution of marriage. We have delivered the largest national roll out of PrEP in Europe.
6OOur plan to back farmers and fisheries to grow our food security py) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION } SECURE FUTURE ) ]
)) Our food and farming sectors) Continue to ringfence agricultural funding generate over £l2O billion for theso it is passed directly on to farming and rural communities in Scotland, Wales and
UK economy every year. In theNorthern Ireland alongside a new UKwide last Parliament, we maintained£2O million Farming Innovation Fund.
the farming budget to support our) Introduce a legally binding target to food security. In England, this hasenhance our food security. The target supported farmers with a range ofwill apply UKwide alongside our UK Food options to choose what works bestSecurity Index, the first of its kind, helping.. us to determine where best to concentrate for them, from business advice to; oe:... farming funds. This will also feed into the new equipment, soil and nutrientdevelopment of the Land Use Framework.
management and hedgerow) Improve public sector procurement to planting. Labour’s actions in Walesdeliver our goal that at least 5O% of food show that they will never be onexpenditure is spent on food produced the side of the farming community. locally or to higher environmental
Their blueprint involves top-downproduction standards.
targets, fundamentally denying) Reform our planning system to deliver ousfikissifor thildi farmers the flexibility they needot infuctntucantae whos.. iuctu, Su to achieve environmental goalsglasshouses, slurry and grain stores, and in ways that work for them andsmall-scale reservoirs.
making their primary job of) Use our significant investment in R&D to keeping the nation fed harder. prioritise cutting-edge technology in areas
Conservatives will always be onsuch as fertiliser and vertical farming.
the side of farmers.) Stick to our plan to support the agricultural sector with the labour it needs to maintain
To continue backing our farmers, we will: FFF our food security, while moving away from
) Increase the UKwide farming budgetthe reliance on seasonal migrant labour by £l billion over the Parliament, with a five-year visa tapered scheme, ensuring it rises by inflation in every year. alongside clear investment in automation
Farmers will be able to spend everyand promoting agri-food careers and skills.
a med he ane poneennainnna) Always stand up for farmers when ood pro vnteen nop ° val Lendnegotiating new trade deals. At the 2O23 our approacn to EnvironmentarranUK Farm to Fork Summit, an event which
Management Schemes. In England, nearlyF.. we will continue every year, we set out our half of all farmers have now signed up to. eo, hhoosihatks best fcommitments to ensure UK farming is at the se emes, c goesing w ar works bes rorheart of UK trade. We will always look for their business to invest in food security and...
tainable agriculture. We will build onthe right deal for farmers. We will continue sus, to support UK agri-food and drink attachés work to date to ensure our schemes work.::.
in our embassies abroad, pioneering new for all farmers, from tenants to the uplandsoe dbdmarkets and new opportunities for our and peyona. domestic food and drink industry.
62) )) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) }
Championing our fishing sector
We have taken back control of our waters post-Brexit and will continue to back our fishing sector to feed the nation, build long term sustainability, and grow coastal businesses from Shetland to Cornwall. In 2O24, we secured quotas worth over £97O million for UK fishermen. We will go further to seek additional opportunities for our inshore fleet in the 2O26 negotiations, and ensure inshore voices are better heard by their representative bodies.
We will replicate the £lOO million UK Seafood
Fund to continue to support the sector to thrive. The fund could be used to invest in harbour and fish market upgrades, provide new equipment and technology for fish processing or to support our growing aquaculture sector.
We will particularly concentrate funding on small and medium sized businesses and the inshore fishing fleet. Recognising competing pressure on marine space, we will also seek opportunities to back the inshore fleet when making marine planning decisions.
The Conservative and Unionist Party Manifesto 2O24633, a -i a! 4E a 7- _i ae_; zaJ aeta4 eae: a
23i:
A -+
--7i a _- ~-a ed <iat
Ss --- -a eeee
- a7
- a.-_n ae:/ eea, a ss3aa eemc
Se oe -- ae: a
- "a ee -- ne:
e ee elee
- i ie; es ‘- a 7 iOur plan to support our rural way of life and enhance our environment
IS) )) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) ]
)) Conservatives are committed toimportance of building flood resilience. Since. oe2OlO, Government investment has better nurturing a thriving rural economy. protected over 6OO, OOO properties from
Rural areas already contributeflooding and coastal erosion, and since 2Ol5, over £25O billion to the economy. has protected over 9OO, OOO acres of farmland..°°AIn 2O2O, we announced a doubling of capital
We will build on this, supportingfunding into flood defences in England to jobs, growth and education in rural a record £5.6 billion over 2O2l-2O27. We communities. will maintain this record flooding funding to continue to protect homes, farms and
Over 8O% of properties across the country canbusinesses. This will work alongside the now access high-speed broadband, up from justFlood Recovery Framework and Farming
7% in 2Ol9, with a record £7l4 million committedRecovery Fund to directly support communities, to boosting rural broadband coverage in 2O24. businesses and farmers affected by flooding.
We will invest in new technology to achieve our ambitious broadband targets for hardto-reachEnh an cin g nature an d areas. On transport, the £2 fare cap has cut rural°° bus fares by over ll% and our commitment in ourprotecting our environment
Backing Drivers Bill not to introduce pay per mile;;; road pricing schemes will ensure people who rely OU" beautiful countryside, coastline, woods on their cars in rural areas are protected. and rivers are a crucial part of what makes our country so special. We are committed
We will do more to boost the availability ofto leaving the environment in a better state affordable housing for local people in ruralfor future generations. We introduced our areas. We will ensure rural exception siteslandmark Environment Act including ambitious support local people into home ownership andtargets to halt nature’s decline by 2O3O and create a dedicated taskforce in Homes EnglandBiodiversity Net Gain, a world leading scheme to deliver on the mission set out in their Ruralto deliver greener new development. We led
Housing Statement to invest in regenerationinternational efforts to protect our oceans and and building high quality homes. We will ensureseas, building on the success of the Blue Belt councils have the powers they need to manageprogramme which protects an area of ocean the uncontrolled growth of holiday lets, whichthe size of India. We will consult UK overseas can cause nuisance to residents and a broaderterritories on opportunities to expand it
‘hollowing out’ of communities. further.
Conservatives will always seek to preserveWe will continue with our moratorium on deep and enhance the rural way of life. We willsea mining and will ratify the Global Oceans make no changes to the Hunting Act. Further, Treaty early in the next Parliament. We have public arms-length bodies must be responsiveprioritised animal welfare, passing legislation to those they serve. Rural communities areto protect pets from harm whilst ensuring clear that improvements must be made to theowners are responsible and cracking down on ways in which these bodies consult and makedangerous dogs such as XL Bullies. We remain decisions, especially from Natural England andcommitted to banning the import of hunting the Environment Agency. We will improve theirtrophies and tackling puppy smuggling and accountability and give them clearer objectiveslivestock worrying.
to focus on. They must take balanced decisions::
and factor in the impact on the rural economy. Water supply interruptions to customers have decreased five-fold and leakage has been
In recent years we have seen increasinglycut by one-third since privatisation. Last year extreme wet weather, underlining the9O% of our designated bathing waters were
66) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) } classified as ‘good’ or ‘excellent’, up from 76%urban greening, focused on the new in 2OlO. But we must go further. That is why wequarters we want to develop in Leeds, set out an ambitious Plan for Water, bringingCambridge and sites in inner London.
historic levels of transparency and investment,.
while keeping bill increases affordable for) Cutred tape that holds back the planting consumers. Our plan includes: of trees in the planning system. This will;; identify particularly suitable areas for tree
) Working with the regulator to further...;;: planting where processes and permits will be hold companies to account, including..:; streamlined.
banning executive bonuses if a company has committed a serious criminal breach. This will I» Deliver our commitment at COP28 to build on our legislation for unlimited fines. introduce forest risk commodities. legislation early in the next Parliament,
) Extending the £5O water rebate for those:::... tackling our impact on illegal deforestation in the South West across the Parliament...
internationally.
) Using fines from water companies to investa in river restoration projects, including linkingWe know that spending time outdoors in.: F. nature can significantly benefit our health and up thriving habitats to multiply the benefits.:..
was.. wellbeing, especially for children. That is why for wildlife and water quality. This will createus.. we set an ambitious commitment for everyone a river recovery network, modelled on ourape., to have access to nature within l5 minutes nature recovery network, and create newwalk of where they live. To deliver this, we will:
destinations for people to enjoy across;;;
England. It will take a more local, tailored} Designate our tth National Park alongside approach like the plan for the River Wye. investing to improve existing National
Parks and protected landscapes.
The next five years will see transformational} Use future rounds of our Landscape investment and change in the water sector
Recovery Scheme to support more local on a scale never seen before, thanks to the. like thty-led sch introduction of lOO% monitoring - up fromProjects " et ¢ community-led schemes
7% under the last Labour Government - andnear Hadrian’s Wall as the area recovers targets on leaks and pollution. To deliver ourfrom the vandalism at the Sycamore Gap.
ambitious plan for water beyond 2O3O, we will) Continue to support programmes that reform the ‘Price Review’ regulatory processencourage disadvantaged children and for water companies. This will consider how; young people to access green spaces.
we move to a more localised catchment-based and outcome-focussed approach, that better) Deliver our commitments on National utilises nature-based solutions and furtherTrails including the Coast to Coast Path strengthens sanctions for water companies thatand the King Charles III England Coast fail to deliver for the public, coasts and rivers. Path.
We are sticking to our ambitious plan to plant} Continue to work with landowners, more trees. We will: charities and others to open up more
6? H
) Deliver our tree planting and peatlandaccess to nature routes. We will not commitments through our Nature forimpose a universal Right to Roam.
Climate funding, and continuing our work toWe will take comprehensive action to crack unlock private investment. down on organised waste crime, especially
) Launch a new design competition forthose who impact protected nature sites.
We will deliver our enhanced penalties for) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) ] fly tipping, giving councils new tools to help tackle offenders. We will continue to develop a UKwide Deposit Return Scheme, while working to minimise the impact on businesses and consumers. We will prevent new waste incinerators being built, including those with recent permit approvals, revoking those where substantial construction has not taken place. This recognises the impact on local communities and that increased recycling rates will reduce the need for incineration capacity in the longer term.
68Our plan to support sport and the creative sector) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ). oye. ensure creators are properly protected an local identities is culture and sport. remunerated for their work, whilst also making
We are proud of our investment in grassrootsthe most of the opportunities of Al and its sports across the country, with over £32Oapplications for creativity in the future.
million being delivered between 2O2l andAs well as standing behind the creative sector
2O25 to build, renovate and maintain grasswe have also stood behind our pubs and pitches and, multi-sport facilities. We willhospitality businesses, prioritising them for maintain this pace of investment over the nextBusiness Rates relief and freezing alcohol duty.
Parliament through the continuation of theBut, in parts of the country, hospitality and
Multi-Sport Grassroots Facilities Programme. particularly our nighttime economy is in decline.
We will look to expand the criteria to ensureIn Wales, Labour have hiked taxes on business more sports benefit from this investment. Weby axing tax relief. In London, despite the high will introduce laws to ensure our fans neverprofile hiring of a ‘Night Czar’ by the Labour again face the threat of clubs in EnglandMayor, over 3, OOO pubs, bars and nightclubs joining breakaway closed-shop competitionshave closed in the capital since March 2O2O.
and giving them more of a voice through theWe will turn this around by launching a review
Independent Football Regulator. of the nighttime economy in England, looking at
The Conservative Party stands up for womenhow to reverse the decline in pubs and clubs and and girls in sport. We delivered equal accesshow to make our towns and cities great places to for grassroots sporting facilities for women andgo out.
girls, the £3O million Lionesses Futures Fund, The BBC should represent the perspectives established the Board of Women’s Sport andof the entire nation with diversity of thought, are implementing recommendations from theaccuracy and impartiality as its guiding
Carney Review of Women’s Football. We willprinciples. We will carefully consider the prioritise equal access for women and girlsfindings of the Funding Review ahead of the in our ongoing programme of investment innext Royal Charter and ensure it upholds these grassroots sports facilities. principles. We will introduce a new complaints process for the BBC so the BBC does not mark
Supporting our world-its own homework.
leading creative industriesThe Conservative Party is a strong defender of
We believe apprenticeships are a key pipelinefreedom of speech and freedom of the press.
of talent into our world-leading creativeWe oppose state regulation and control of the industries. We will work with industry to deliverpress, including any attempt to bring forward a dedicated flexible coordination service soLeveson 2 or reopen the Royal Charter on that everyone who wants to work in the film, self-regulation of the press. We were proud
TV, gaming and music sectors can work on liveto deliver the Freedom of Speech Act to productions whilst benefiting from at least l2protect free speech and open debate in our months of secure training. universities.
We will ensure our creative sector tax incentives remain competitive. The UK is now the second most popular place in the world to make films and high-end TV. That’s a direct result of Conservatives taking action: there have been l million new jobs since 2OlO and the economic value of the creative industries has doubled. We provided an unprecedented £l.57
7OOur plan to strengthen the United Kingdom pt) ) ) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION } SECURE FUTURE ) ]
)) In recent years, each part of theand protecting consumers and businesses from unnecessary trade barriers. IntraUK trade is
UK has worked together to tackleworth £l9O billion, and to boost this, we have shared challenges. The Unitedlegislated to guarantee unfettered access for
Kingdom is a unique and uniquelygoods from Northern Ireland to the rest of the
°: UK and will establish a new Intertrade UK body successful Union, enabling eacha.. to promote trade within the United Kingdom.
constituent part to grow andThe UK Internal Market Act ensures businesses thrive. As the Conservative andcan sell goods and provide services freely
Unionist Party, we are committedacross the UK.
to supporting our Union and.
a. Levelling up across the UK continuing to deliver for peopleg up across the UK. Delivering for people right across the country requires joint working between the UK and
During the 25th anniversary year of devolution, devolved governments as well as local we celebrate the progress which has beenpartners. Our focus on delivery and working made and the relationships which have beenwith local partners to do so, has paid dividends built. We are focused on working together toin recent years, providing:
deliver for people across the UK, includinga;;; maintaining meaningful intergovernmental) over £3 billion of investment in levelling up relations. Since the initial devolutionin Scotland; settlements, significant further powers have) over £2.5 billion to level up Wales; and been devolved to Holyrood, Cardiff Bay and.;;;
Stormont. We believe governments in Scotland,? over £l billion for levelling up projects in
Wales and Northern Ireland now have the rightNorthern Ireland.
balance of powers to deliver for people there.
The UK Government has a duty to citizens
As powers have been transferred, it hasright across the country. Over the course of become more important than ever that thethe last Parliament we have been building devolved governments are held responsiblestronger relationships with local authorities for their performance. To support this, we willand community groups in Scotland, Wales and legislate to deliver comparable data across theNorthern Ireland to help us deliver for people
UK so the performance of public services canthere. We are committed to continuing to fund be accurately compared. projects across the UK directly and will:
We support greater accountability within) Extend the UK Shared Prosperity Fund for the devolved parliaments and centralisationanother three years, delivering a further within Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland£54O million a year for communities across to ensure decisions are made as close toScotland, Wales and Northern Ireland.
the communities they serve as possible.) Expand the Long-Term Plan for Towns, ewe Ceres be eelssupporting a further nine towns in Scotland, on utllising the powers they have to deliverWales and Northern Ireland with £2O on people’s priorities and we will continue to_.. million endowments to make long-term oppose attempts to distract from these with; constitutional wrangling. improvements over lO years.;;) Maintain the Community Ownership
We will relentlessly protect the UK’s internal..-Fund for another three years, enabling market, securing Northern Ireland’s place in it.
community groups across Scotland, Wales
72))) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION SECURE FUTURE ) } and Northern Ireland to continue accessingScotland funding to save community assets which are at risk of being lost. Ten years on from the 2Ol4 independence
} Continue the Multi-Sport Grassrootspeibaidieia the SNP remain focused on the weeconstitution while Scotland has moved on. They
Facilities Programme throughout the nextare distracted from the day job, with falling
Parliament so sports facilities in Scotland, educational standards, rising drug deaths and
Wales and Northern Ireland can access vitallong-delayed ferries. The Conservatives and investment. Unionists will continue to oppose this - the
2Ol4 vote was decisive.
These schemes improve communities and support infrastructure as well as sportsInstead, we will focus on what really matters to and cultural activities across the UK, sittingpeople.
alongside our backing for events such as the
Hay Festival, the Edinburgh Festival and FringeWe will cut taxes for working people again, and the UK and Ireland Euro 2O28 tournament. benefitting 2.4 million Scots. We are also boosting
Scotland’s economy through mechanisms such
We will support Freeports and investmentas our City and Growth Deals, dedicated British zones in Scotland and Wales, delivering jobsBusiness Bank fund and support for Scottish and investment from the Cromarty Firth to Portexports. Our new Intertrade UK body will promote
Talbot, and establish an Enhanced Investmenttrade within the United Kingdom, with 6l% of
Zone in Northern Ireland. Scotland’s exports going to the rest of the UK in
2O2l.
We will pursue the extension of the Enhanced
Investment Zone to cover Stranraer andWe will press for the permanent removal
Cairnryan on the west coast of Scotland, of tariffs on Scotch whisky with the US recognising this vital route between NorthernGovernment and work to achieve a significant
Ireland and Scotland and the opportunities fortariff reduction in India through free trade trade and economic growth. agreement discussions. Scottish businesses;;; will also continue to benefit from measures
Our Islands Forum will also continue to bringincluding tax reliefs for creative industries, together island communities from across thesupport for small businesses and entrepreneurs
UK to consider and identify solutions to theirand the Global Britian Investment Fund.
unique needs.
We will prioritise our energy security. We have already put the Energy Security Investment
Mechanism into legislation, ensuring the energy profits levy will end when oil and gas prices fall below a threshold. We will bring legislate to require annual oil and gas licensing rounds and maintain investment allowances for the oil and gas sector while supporting renewable technologies.
We will continue backing the North Sea
Transition Deal and Aberdeen City Region Deal, with Aberdeen’s Investment Zone bringing £l6O million of support to the area over the next ten years. We will focus on supporting Scotland’s workforce transition to new industries such
The Conservative and Unionist Party Manifesto 2O2473) )) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) } as carbon capture, offshore wind, hydrogenWales and tidal, including by providing £l5 million to support the Energy Transition Zone’s skillsThe Labour Welsh Government have let programmes. We will continue laying thestandards slide across crucial public services groundwork for nuclear projects to be takenwhile focusing on policies people in Wales do forward in Scotland to deliver cheaper, cleanernot want, from putting more politicians in the and more secure energy. Senedd to implementing a blanket 2OOmph. to. speed limit across Wales and banning new
We will support Scotland’s fishing andwy:
oe. roadbuilding.
farming industries. We have extended the
Seasonal Agricultural Workers Scheme untilBy contrast, the Conservatives and Unionists
2O29, introduced a new Ukwide Food Securityare delivering for Wales by cutting taxes
Index and will increase the UKwide farmingagain for l.2 million working people in Wales budget by £l billion over the next Parliament, and making investments in industry, local ensuring the ringfenced amount provided tocommunities and infrastructure.
the Scottish Government rises by inflation each year. We will use powers in the Scotland ActAnd we want to go further.
to require the Scottish Government to provide annual reports on how this funding is beingTo improve connectivity across Wales, utilised and work with them to put a UKwidewe'll provide match funding to the Welsh food security target into law. Government to reconsider the M4 relief road and third Menai crossing options as well as
We will establish a UK Farming Innovationwider improvements to the A55 and the A483
Fund to deliver grants for innovativearound Wrexham. We will provide funding to agricultural projects directly to farmers inMonmouthshire Council to develop plans for
Scotland, promoting economic developmenta Chepstow bypass and prioritise the Pantin rural areas. Only the Conservatives andLlanymynech bypass.
Unionists will support Scotland’s fishing communities, with a further £lOO million forthe AS 4 result of our decision to cancel the second
UK Seafood Fund to support small businessesphase of HS2 and invest the savings into local and inshore fleets and a steadfast commitmenttransport projects, we can commit £l billion to taking back control of our waters, negotiatingfor the electrification of the North Wales Main the best quotas possible and remaining out ofLine and ensure Wales starts receiving Barnett the hated Common Fisheries Policy. consequentials for the projects funded from
HS2 savings in England. We will fund rail
We will improve connectivity across Scotlandupgrades at Padeswood to unlock the potential with support for road and rail improvementsfor wider improvements on the Borderlands and ferry services, including guaranteedLine and facilitate the electrification of the investment to improve pinch points on theNorth Wales Main Line. We will prioritise
A75, providing £5 million for the evaluation ofdevelopment of the Pencoed level crossing proposals to extend the current Borders Railwayand progressing work on the South Wales Main from Tweedbank through Hawick and on toLine, to deliver new stations and services.
Carlisle, updating the East Coast Main Line timetable to provide faster rail journeys between We will expand our Backing Drivers’ Bill to
Edinburgh and London and providing funding for 9 cower Wales, reversing Labour's blanket 2Omph the UK Islands Forum Connectivity Project. speed limit by requiring local consent for
2Omph zones and giving local communities the legal right to challenge existing zones.
74) )) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE )
To support Wales’ key sectors and industrialWe will continue working with the Welsh heritage, Welsh farmers will benefit from a £lGovernment on the expansion of Levelling billion increase to the UKwide farming budget, Up Partnerships to Wales and support the ensuring the ringfenced amount directed toWelsh language, including by backing Welsh
Welsh farmers increases by inflation throughoutbroadcasting and the equitable provision of UK the next Parliament, as well as grants forGovernment services in Welsh.
innovative agricultural projects from the £2O million UK Farming Innovation Fund and theWe will bring forward legislation to reapply the extension of the Seasonal Agricultural Workerentirety of the Trade Union Act 2Ol6 to Wales.
Scheme. And a Welsh Conservative Government would reverse Labour’s plans to expand the Senedd,
We will also build on our new UKwide foodredirecting the cost towards people’s real security index by putting a UKwide foodpriorities.
security target into law, adopt a consistent approach to biosecurity across Great Britain and require the Welsh Government to provide annual reports on how ringfenced agricultural funding from the UK Government is spent.
The £5OO million we are investing to secure a sustainable future for steelmaking in Port
Talbot is bolstered by the £8O million the UK
Government is providing to support the area to transition. We remain committed to delivering the electric arc furnace and supporting Port
Talbot to thrive, including through the new
Celtic Freeport. Floating offshore wind is at the heart of these plans and we will continue to support its development in the Celtic Sea. We will deliver the UK’s third mega-nuclear power station at Wylfa and support Wales’ potential to host small modular reactors.
To strengthen Wales’ public services, we will put an additional neighbourhood police officer in every community across Wales, restore trust in policing and introduce tougher sentencing to make Wales safer.
Improving the comparability of data across the UK will ensure the current Labour Welsh
Government are held to account for their performance running Wales’ schools and hospitals. We will assess options to promote choice in NHS services across the UK, whether provided by the NHS or independent sector, and improve interoperability between the
NHS in different parts of the UK, cross-border healthcare processes and joint working to tackle waiting lists.
The Conservative and Unionist Party Manifesto 2O2475) )) CLEAR PLAN ) BOLD ACTION ) SECURE FUTURE ) }
Northern Irelandand provide Northern Ireland with unique advantages, including guaranteed unfettered
As Conservatives and Unionists, we continue toaccess to the UK internal market and hugely value Northern Ireland’s contribution toprivileged access to the EU Single Market our Union. For us, the best future for Northernfor goods. Through our UK internal market
Ireland will always be as part of a strong, system, we have ensured that goods moving prosperous and dynamic United Kingdom. We willfrom Great Britain to Northern Ireland that never be neutral in expressing our support for it. will only ever stay in the United Kingdom
At the same time, we respect those who seekare subject to no checks, save for those a different constitutional outcome pursued byconducted by UK authorities as part of a exclusively peaceful and democratic means. Werisk-based or intelligence-led approach to will always govern in the interests of the wholetackle criminality, abuse of the scheme, community in Northern Ireland. Our aim is tosmuggling and disease risks. In addition, build a Northern Ireland where politics works, thethrough the Stormont Brake we have economy grows and society is stronger and moreaddressed the democratic deficit in the old united. Protocol. A Conservative Government will
Our commitment to the l998 Belfast (Good Friday)Winteo teeny its conc nand py the
Agreement in all its parts remains unwavering.. in sor ramework and the Command Paper,
Fundamental to the Agreement is the consentincluding those measures to strengthen principle - that there can be no change to theNorthern Ireland’s place in the Union.
constitutional status of Northern Ireland without) Through the Northern Ireland Troubles the support ofa majority of those who live there.(Legacy and Reconciliation) Act 2O23
Conservatives will always uphold the democraticwe have established the Independent wishes of the people of Northern Ireland. acreas
Commission for Reconciliation and
) We are committed to supporting NorthernInformation Recovery with £25O million
Ireland’s communities and economy toof funding to ensure victims and survivors thrive. At the last Spending Review, wecan recover more information about what provided the Northern Ireland Executivehappened to their loved ones than has been with a record £l5 billion a year through theavailable through established mechanisms.
block grant. To underpin the restorationWe will continue to implement this legacy of devolution, we provided the incominglegislation and support the Commission with
Executive with a £3.3 billion spendingthe aim of providing more answers to those package and subsequently agreed an interimthat want them and helping society to move fiscal framework in May 2O24. We are alsoforward.
delivering over £l billion of levelling u; g. ig uP) While the security situation has been funding, including £l5O million to develop.
transformed for most people in Northern an Enhanced Investment Zone. We hosted
_. Ireland over the past three decades, there an Investment Summit in Northern Ireland..
oe,. remains a very real threat from dissident last year, showcasing its innovation and.. ae... republicans who retain both a capability and technological strengths. And cutting National.: F oo,., intent to cause harm. We will always give our
Insurance again will benefit 8OO, OOO working...
eople in Northern Irelandfullest possible support to the Police Service peop: of Northern Ireland and other agencies for the
) The Windsor Framework and ourvital work they do to keep people safe and
Safeguarding the Union Command Papersecure. We will continue our efforts to end have addressed the fundamental problemsall forms of paramilitary activity for good.
with the old Northern Ireland Protocoll zz%%, Conservati onservatives
The Conservative and Unionist Party Manifesto 2O24
Promoted by Alan Mabbutt on behalf of the Conservative and Unionist Party, both at 4 Matthew Parker Street, London, SWlH 9HQ.
Printed by Paragon, Park House, Lower Ground Floor, l6l8 Finsbury Circus, London, EC2M 7EB.
[SGM OTS )-9O63l455-O