) Change
{, I: x. Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change inge Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change ChaLabour Party Manifesto 2O24This election is about change. First, that politics should be driven by a sense of service to the
A chance to stop the endlesscountry, not considerations of
Conservative chaos that hasparty or self-interest.
directly harmed the finances of every family in Britain. Second, that if you work hard then - whoever you are,
A moment where we can turnwherever you started in life - the page on a set of ideas that, Britain is a country that will over I4 years, have consistentlyrespect your contribution and left us More vulnerable nangive you a fair chance to get on.
increasingly volatile world.;; When I consider these beliefs, it
And an opportunity to beginis hard not to think back to my the work of national renewal. childhood. Then, as now, Britain’s
A rebuilding of our country, place in the world was uncertain.
sO that itonce again servesThen, as now, our economy was the interests of working people. gripped by stuttering growth and
Restore hopea costof-living crisis that hurt
Every great nation is held together - Working people.
by shared beliefs. To outsidersYet back then, there was at least they may not seem exceptional; a degree of security in being able or distinctive, but they are essentialto take those two fundamental for a sense of collective nationalbeliefs for granted. For families
PUTPOse. Britain is no different, like mine, this was a comfort. The but at this moment two of ourknowledge that Britain would offer most important beliefs are inyour children a better future gave grave danger. us hope. A hope that may not
4 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24a -:
\ xy ity
A > es j a
-_- as
’ad
Change Labour Party M:; f epee’: ‘ ae 47°
Rt)oa.* 4AR f¢. ~.: eoAa }
\'7H ~~. ¢€Wy aS~):'.4 b Ie~~»
“aa Ladfe ymI
“I.
7:,; r sound high-minded or particularly - decline - that will continue if they idealistic, but which families likereturn for five more years. Only a mine could build a life around. Labour government can break this cycle and stop the chaos.
Stop the chaos
To restore this hope, we must firstTurn the page end the Conservative chaos. TheWe must turn the page decisively visible decline in our communities - on the Conservative ideas that families weighed down by soaringhave caused the chaos.
mortgages; people waiting on trolleys in A&E; sewage in our riversThe world has become increasingly
- is not an accident. Rather, it is aee a MAJor war in Europe direct result of a governing partyor the first time in a generation that, time and again, puts its ownand ever greater pe to the interests and obsessions above the living eons ° working people.
issues that affect families. This ‘age of Insecurity’ requires the government to step up, not
The result is a vicious cycle - decline stand aside.
feeding off chaos, chaos feeding off
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24This means a return to thesee is one where working people foundations of good government: never let each other down. They national security, secure borders, came together in the pandemic - and economic stability. But it alsomissed weddings, funerals and last requires an enduring partnershipgoodbyes - to save the lives with business to deliver theof people they will never meet.
economic growth we need. They dug deep in the years
It needs more focus on longof austerity, to keep delivering term strategy, not the short-termthe public services people distractions that can animateneeded. And throughout the
Westminster. And it demands acostof-living crisis, they found final and total rejection of the toxic away to support those less idea that economic growth is gifted fortunate than themselves.
from the few to the many.;;
We are still a great nation.
Because whether it is crashingWe can still achieve great things.
the pound to give tax cuts to theWhat we lack is a government richest l%; degrading public services that can match the ambition because of a mess made byworking people have for their the banks; or the failure to investfamily and community, with in clean British energy that lefta credible long-term plan.
us exposed when Putin invaded
Ukraine - so much of what Britain -_-‘ This manifesto is that plan.
has been through in the past l4Fully costed, fully funded - built years is explained by a Conservative Na rock of fiscal responsibility.
failure to face the future. Only;;;
Labour can turn the page. At its heart are five national missions - with clear first steps
Rebuild our countryto begin the journey of rebuilding
We must rebuild our country. It- that provide a clear destination will not be easy. Not only becausefor everyone invested in Britain’s there is no quick fix to the messfuture. A new Britain, where wealth is the Conservatives have made. But - created in every community. Where also, because their failures havethe golden opportunity of clean sapped our collective confidenceBritish power is harnessed for lower that Britain can still achieve greatbills. Where your town centre has things. I reject this with every fibrebeen revitalised and everyone feels of my being. Despite all the chaossafe to walk the streets. Where you inflicted on Britain, the country Ican go to work and know you will
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 7CONS 23..\ ".,. »,
* “s.:.;
7 >) r _:
’;' j ma »‘ -
E. y wae
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24Five national missions - with clear first steps to begin the journey of rebuilding be treated with dignity and respect. But to succeed we need everyone,
Where our children are equippedevery community, to play their part.
with the skills to thrive in the future. I know, after everything you have
Where our NHS is once again at the been through in the past l4 years, cutting edge of healthcare. Andthat this is a hard request to make.
where we show that politics canbe But I also expect, deep down, that about serving the country. you know this is what our country. needs now - an end to the chaos,
It's time for change;; a turning of the page, and a
I know some people will roll theirpatient but determined rebuilding eyes at this last sentence. Yetof our country.
serving our country is the only reason I came into politics. TheSo, I invite you to join us in this defining purpose of my Labourcommon endeavour of national leadership has been to drag myrenewal. It is time to change Britain.
party away from the dead end of gesture politics and return it once more to the service of working{WA" people. I have changed my party._Now I want the chance to bring that Keir Starmer change to the country. Leader of the Labour Party
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 9‘s first
Labour's firs for ste bed S change l. Deliver economic stabilit with tough spending rules, so we can grow our economy and keep taxes, inflation and mortgages as low as possible.
2. Cut NHS waiting times with 4O, OOO more appointments each week, during evenings and weekends, paid for by cracking down on tax avoidance and non-dom loopholes.
3. Launch a new Border Security Command with hundreds of new specialist investigators and use counter-terror powers to smash the criminal boat gangs.
4. Set up Great British Energ a publicly-owned clean power company, to cut bills for good and boost energy security, paid for by a windfall tax on oil and gas giants.
5. Crack down on antisocial behaviour with more neighbourhood police paid for by ending wasteful contracts, tough new penalties for offenders, and a new network of youth hubs.
6. Recruit 6,5OO new teachers in key subjects to prepare children for life, work and the future, paid for by ending tax breaks for private schools.
lO Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24CONTENTS
Mission-driven governMent c. cccccscssssssssssssscssssessesscssosscsscsessesccssesees IZ
Strong FOUNAATIONGccccscssrsessesscrecsesssscccsccsccscsessessossosscsecsecsessesecscoses IA
Kickstart ECONOMIC GrOoWthccccsccscccssscssscessessecsccscsscssssessesscssesecseoss LO
Make Britain a clean energy SUPErPOWETc. cccccscsscssscescecsccccssccecsesee 47
Take back Our Streets cccccccocsscocssscvecccesccccecccceccccecescceccoecccsceccceeccsceccorees Ol
Break down the barriers to opportunity cccccccsscscccsscscescecsecceesee lD
Build ain NHS fit for the fUtUTEecsccsccssssccssssssessecscssessscecsessesscsscsecsecses OT
Serving the COUNErY c.. ccscccsssccsssccsssessesssscrscsesssssessessesecsecsessessessosesseee] OD
Britain reconnected c. cccccsccsccssssssesssssesscsscsscsescessesscssesecsecsessesecseosessees TIS
Labour's fiscal plaincccccccscscscssscscscccccscscscscssecssscssocssecscscssccssecscscssoess ILO
CHANGE ccccccscccecccecscccecccccccccscccceccccsccceeccceecccceccceecccoeccscecccoscccscecsceccoceccoree LOT
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 IMISSION-DRIVEN
Ending the Conservative chaosSo, as well as a new administration is vital, but turning the page withwith new priorities, Britain needs a new government is not in itselfa new approach: mission-driven enough to tackle the deep-rooted government.
challenges our country now faces. a;
To rebuild Britain, we need toMission-driven government means change how Britain is governed. ralsing our sights as a nation and focusing on ambitious, measurable,
For too long, Britain has been heldlong-term objectives that provide back by governments that, because a driving sense of purpose for the they lack a relentless focus oncountry. It means a new way of long-term ends, are buffeted about doing government that is more by events. Politics has enormousjoined up, pushes power out to potential to change lives for thecommunities and harnesses new better, but too often different parts - technology, all with one aim in mind of the government have pursued- to put the country back in the their own narrow goals rather than service of working people.
working together. Government is at its best when working in partnership with business, trade unions, civil society, faith groups, and communities. But without a shared project those partnerships barely get off the ground.
]2 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24LABOUR'S FIVE MISSIONSDelivering the change Britain
TO REBUILD BRITAIN ARE: needs will require perseverance.;; The starting point for delivering l) Kickstart economic growththese missions is to ensure the to secure the highest sustainedfoundations of good government growth inthe G/ 7 with good; are right. Labour will make sure
Jobs and productivity growth nwe have strong national security, every part of the country makingsecure borders, and economic everyone, not just a few, better off. stability. Building on these secure
2) Make Britain a clean energyfoundations, we have already set superpower to cut bills, createout the first steps for change.
Jobs and deliver security with; Today we present further policies in cheaper, zero-carbon electricitythis manifesto, as part of the journey by 2O3O, accelerating to net zero. of rebuilding our country.
3) Take back our streets by halvingEvery policy that follows in this serious violent crime and raising anifesto is fully costed and confidence in the police andfully funded.
criminal justice system to its highest levels.
4) Break down barriers to opportunity by reforming our childcare and education systems, to make sure there is no class ceiling on the ambitions of young people in Britain.
5) Build an NHS fit for the future that is there when people need it; with fewer lives lost to the biggest killers; in a fairer Britain, where everyone lives well for longer.
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 l3I:
laaao- eo:
A Pa,
-- a
2ol,
-.\ yy
STRONG FOUNDATIONS
No policy commitment in pursuit of Labour's missions matters unless we uphold the first duty of any government: to keep the country safe.
Peace and security are hard earned. They require constant vigilance.
Over the last l4 years geopolitical tensions have risen, while the
Conservatives have hollowed out our armed forces. Now Putin is attempting to break European security with his full-scale invasion of
Ukraine. Labour will meet this challenge by strengthening our armed forces and protecting our national security.
l4 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24The first duty of any government is to keep the country safe
Our commitment to the UK’sFrom the Skripal poisonings to nuclear deterrent is absolute. assassination plots by the Iranian
Itis a vital safeguard for the UKIslamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, and our NATO allies. As the partythreats from hostile states or statethat founded NATO, we maintainsponsored groups are on the rise, our unshakeable commitmentbut Britain lacks a comprehensive to the alliance, and we will applyframework to protect us. Labour will a NATO test to major defencetake the approach used for dealing programmes to ensure we meetwith non-state terrorism and adapt our obligations in full. it to deal with state-based domestic security threats.
In recent years, threats to our safety and security have multiplied - Terrorism remains a significant and diversified. Alongside greaterthreat. Labour will bring in ‘Martyn’s conventional threats, we are faced _ Law’ to strengthen the security of with the growing emergencepublic events and venues. We will of hybrid warfare, includingupdate the rules around countercyber-attacks and misinformationextremism, including online, to campaigns which seek to subvertstop people being radicalised and our democracy. To ensure the UKdrawn towards hateful ideologies.
is fully prepared to deal with theseLabour will also ensure the police interconnected threats, Labourand intelligence services have the will conduct a Strategic Defencepowers and resources they need
Review within our first year into protect the British people from government, and we will setterrorism and hostile espionage.
out the path to spending
2.5 per cent of GDP on defence.
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 l5: Nya i; i;
Britain is a tolerant and compassionate country. We have a proud tradition of welcoming people fleeing persecution and abuse. Schemes like Homes for Ukraine, Hong Kong humanitarian visas, and the Syrian resettlement programme have provided important routes for refugees seeking sanctuary. But the system needs to be controlled and managed and we need strong borders. The small boats crisis, fuelled by dangerous criminal smuggler gangs, is undermining our security and costing lives.
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24Rather than a serious plan tola bour Wi I stop confront this crisis, the Conservatives have offered nothing but desperate the chaos O nd immicks. Their flagship policy - to iy a tiny number of asylum seekersgO after the to Rwanda - has already costll hundreds of millions of pounds. criminal JANgs
Even if it got off the ground, this scheme can only address fewer than one per cent of the asylum seekers arriving. It cannot work. lead joint investigations with their
Chaos in the Channel has been
European counterparts.
matched by chaos at home. The
Conservatives’ unworkable lawsLabour will turn the page and have created a ‘perma-backlog’ of restore order to the asylum tens of thousands of asylum seekers, system so that it operates swiftly, who are indefinitely staying in hotels firmly, and fairly; and the rules are costing the taxpayer millions ofproperly enforced. We will hire pounds every week. additional caseworkers to clear the: Conservatives’ backlog and end
Labour will stop the chaos and.
_asylum hotels, saving the taxpayer go after the criminal gangs whobillions of pounds.
trade in driving this crisis. We will create a new Border SecurityLabour will set up a new returns and
Command, with hundreds of newenforcement unit, with an additional investigators, intelligence officers, l, OOO staff, to fast-track removals and cross-border police officers. to safe countries for people who
This will be funded by ending thedo not have the right to stay here.
wasteful Migration and EconomicWe will negotiate additional returns
Development partnership witharrangements to speed up returns
Rwanda. This new Commandand increase the number of safe will work internationally and becountries that failed asylum seekers supported by new counterterrorism can swiftly be sent back to. And we style powers, to pursue, disrupt, and - will also act upstream, working with arrest those responsible for the vile international partners to address trade. We will seek a new securitythe humanitarian crises which lead agreement with the EU to ensurepeople to flee their homes, and to access to real-time intelligencestrengthen support for refugees in and enable our policing teams totheir home region.
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 l7. 7s ee eFeeereaeeees " °
\ 4ee y- lll <, a,
STRONG FOUNDATIONS
Every commitment a Labour government makes will be based on sound money and economic stability. This is a non-negotiable principle for our changed Labour Party. Siren voices may claim that there are no limits on what government can spend, or that tax cuts pay for themselves.
We reject this flawed ideology that was tested to destruction by the l8 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24disastrous Conservative ‘miniThese rules allow for prudent budget’. The British people are stillinvestment in our economy.
paying the price of those unfunded _ This represents a clear break commitments through higherfrom the Conservatives who mortgage costs, and taxpayershave created an incentive to cut continue to foot the bill throughinvestment; a short-term approach higher interest payments, meaning - that ignores the importance of less money for investment andgrowing the economy. Labour will public services. The impact wasstrike a balance between prioritising not confined to these shores. Theinvestment and the urgent need
Conservatives’ recklessness sentto rebuild our public finances.
a signal of instability across theThere will be no return to austerity.
world that damaged our standing, making Britain a less attractiveUnlike the Conservatives, Labour place for business to invest. will never sideline the Office for
Budget Responsibility (OBR) for
The chaos is not over. political convenience. Instead, we
The desperate Conservativeswill strengthen the role of the OBR.
have now made yet moreEvery fiscal event making significant unfunded tax cuts and spendingchanges to taxation or spending promises at a scale beyondwill be subject to an independent the ‘mini budget’. This wouldOBR forecast.
be devastating for families across the country. Labour will safeguard taxpayers’ money. We will end the link between
Labour will turn the page on thisaccess to ministers and an inside economic chaos. Our approach is track for public contracts. We based on strong fiscal rules whichwill appoint a fixed-term Covid will govern every single decisionCorruption Commissioner and use we make in government. every means possible to recoup
Our fiscal rules are that: public money lost in pandemicrelated fraud and from contracts
¢ The current budget moves intowhich have not delivered. And we balance, so that dayto-daywill not tolerate fraud or waste costs are met by revenuesanywhere, whether in social security or the excessive use of consultants.
e Debt must be falling as a share of the economy by theAlongside strong national finances, fifth year of the forecast. Britain needs resilient family
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 l9I o y.
aIa“ oa' In
Ou rad e) e) roach isfinances too. The Conservatives have left families struggling with the based On strongcost of living. Labour will take action:. to support families, by tackling the fiscal ru les wh ichunderlying causes of the crisis.
Qove rn eve ryWe will bring down the cost of.*energy. We will reduce food prices
SING le decisionby removing barriers to businesses ltrading. We will make housin we make ingg more affordable, expand access to governmentchildcare, and make work pay. We will support families with children by introducing free breakfast clubs eein every primary school. Labour will also keep mortgage rates as low as possible, with a strong,
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24We will bring down the cost of energy.
We will reduce prices by removing barriers to businesses trading. We will make housing more affordable, expand access to childcare, and make work pay independent Bank of England -their taxes here. Private equity is the which will continue to target stable - only industry where performanceinflation of 2 per cent. related pay is treated as capital;; gains. Labour will close this loophole.
The Conservatives have raised the tax burden to a 7Oyear high. WeWe will modernise HMRC and will ensure taxes on working people - change the law to tackle tax are kept as low as possible. Labour avoidance. We will increase will not increase taxes on workingregistration and reporting people, which is why we will notrequirements, strengthen HMRC’s increase National Insurance, thepowers, invest in new technology basic, higher, or additional ratesand build capacity within HMRC. This, of Income Tax, or VAT. combined with a renewed focus on;;; tax avoidance by large businesses
Labour will address unfairness in the and the wealthy, will begin to close tax system. We will abolish nen-dom the tax gap and ensure everyone status once and for all, replacing itpays their fair share.
with a modern scheme for people genuinely in the country for aLabour will stop the chaos, short period. We willend the use of _ turn the page, and return to offshore trusts to avoid inheritance - the foundations of national tax so that everyone who makessecurity, secure borders, their home here in the UK paysand economic stability.
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 2la;\roe we ae aan aS,' 5we
‘ea 6NGY4c: -_ay 222 -- I +f 3 SSS
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24© Deliver economic stability with tough spending rules
© Anew partnership with business to boost growth everywhere
© ANational Wealth Fund to invest in jobs
© Planning reform to build l.5 million new homes
© Devolution of power across England
© A New Deal for Working PeopleI Lif fa]’ aU
MY STORY a rl a *” f;“ts g mM
(a le
Y; SS
Charlie, cafe owner and former Conservative voter
“Change is overdue. Since we opened our cafe in June 2O2O our gas and electric bill has soared. Customers are feeling the pinch so some visit us less often. How can we pass these costs on to customers when they can't afford to pay more? Continuing like this will ruin us. I voted Conservative before but the only way out of this is Labour's plan for economic growth.
Cheaper bills for us and our customers, and that bit of extra cash to spend.
That's the change we need.”
24 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24Sustained economic growth isIt is ti me to turn the only route to improving the prosperity of our country and thethe Dage. La bou l living standards of working people. l
That is why it is Labour's first mission WI! restore for government. It means being pro- sta bility, INCreadSe business and pro-worker. We are:
the party of wealth creation. Investment,
This election follows the chaos ofe) nd reform the Conservatives mint budgetour economy and an unprecedented fall in living standards. Their miserable economic record over the past l4 years has seen productivity and wages flatlining, leaving British families significantly poorer than those in France or Germany.
This decline is rooted in two failures.
First, an inability to accept thatera of rising global competition a strong economy can only beand tension, instead leaving our built on the contribution of everyeconomy on an increasingly community and every person _ the shallow and insecure footing.
many not the few. Second, a failure to acknowledge that sustainableIt is time to turn the page.
growth requires government to be - Labour will restore stability, a strategic partner with business- increase investment, and reform that markets must be shaped, notour economy.
merely served.;
We will embrace a new approach
These twin failures have led toto economic management - greater economic insecurity - inthe securonomics - that understands financial resilience of households, sustainable growth relies on but also in our national economya broad base and resilient
- at the very time when our worldfoundations. Our approach has become less stable and secure. will depend on a dynamic and
The Conservatives have failed tostrategic state. This does not grasp the implications of a newmean ever-growing government,
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 25; s
-- a ee* ss.: >yat ¥4. ae
-_éI q {> but it does mean a more active, private sector investment, smarter government that works increate jobs, and provide a return partnership with business, tradefor taxpayers.
unions, local leaders, and devolved governments. While stability and greater investment will support growth,
Labour will stop the chaos andparts of our economy require support business through a stable -_ substantial reform if we are to policy environment - strengthening - create the wealth our country our economic institutions, andneeds. Britain is hampered by giving investors the certainty theya planning regime that means need to fuel growth. Labour willseek we struggle to build either the involvement from industry, tradeinfrastructure or housing the unions, and civil society in our plans country needs.
for growth, so they can contribute to building a stronger economyThe country remains too centralised, in all parts of the country. We willwith the economic potential of too strategically use public investment - many regions and communities where it can unlock additionalignored. Our labour market fails to
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24provide secure jobs and, as a result, The innovation, for far too many people work does.
not pay. dynamism and
The innovation, dynamism andsheer hard work of sheer hard work of British businesstH and workers has never beenBritish workers has in question. The next Labournever been IN government will partner with.
them to kickstart economic growthquestion and rebuild Britain.
Strategic partnership througha industrial strategy
Labour will introduce a new industrial strategy. Our approachRICHARD will be mission-driven and focusedW on the future. We will work inALKER OBE partnership with industry to seizeExecutive Chairman opportunities and remove barriersof Iceland to growth. Critically, we will end“Labour's plan for the economy short-term economic policy:
making with the establishmentis good news for my customers of an Industrial Strategy Council, and colleagues in high streets on a statutory footing, to provideGENES TID Ga Miho Melets expert advice. We will ensureMII BEiig) stability geod) obs representation on the Council fromClie lif bch Lis SSeS Sh all nations and regions, businessESCA NESS IECER allan and trade unions, to drive economicsick and tired of chaos under growth in all parts of the country. absolutely convinced that
Labour will take a sectoral approachKeir Starmer is the leader and be clear-eyed about whereto deliver the change this the UK enjoys advantages overcountry needs. Labour will other countries. Our approach willend division, strengthen our back what makes Britain great: communities and protect the our excellent research institutions, environment. That’s why I'll be professional services, advancedvoting Labour and I urge you to manufacturing, and creativedo the same.”
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 27llcreative sectors, on the approach
We will work in, nine GPR.. we will take to policy. In government, partnership With -- wewill set out plans for these and
IIother vital sectors of the economy.
industry to seize’
O fe) ele rtun ities ANd Boosting investment: Business has for too long been remove ba Mrlershampered by a government that does not work with it. As a result, to growth:, I investment in the UK is too low. To address this long-standing problem
Labour will use every available lever. Public investment, where it supports and derisks additional private investment, is one important tool being used successfully across industries. We will ensure athe world. It can create good jobs pro-business environment, across the country and would with a competition and regulatory - mean British taxpayers can reap framework, that supportsthe benefits of economic growth.
innovation, investment, andTo realise these opportunities high-quality jobs. ProcurementLabour will establish a National and trade policy will also be aligned Wealth Fund.
with our industrial strategy priorities.... Capitalised with £73 billion over the
Financial services are one oe,. course of the next Parliament, the of Britain’s greatest success stories.. wa. National Wealth Fund will have a
Labour will create the conditions;.. remit to support Labour's growth to support innovation and growthi... and clean energy missions, making in the sector, through supporting--,. transformative investments across new technology, including Open; every part of the country. The fund
Banking and Open Finance:.... will have a target of attracting and ensuring a pro-innovation; three pounds of private investment regulatory framework.; for every one pound of public
Our other great British industriesinvestment, creating jobs across the need certainty over the policies that country. We plan to allocate:
will apply to them. In opposition,
Labour has worked with thee £l.8 billion to upgrade ports and automotive, life sciences, andbuild supply chains across the UK
28 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24a» a +O + {
Fsof i /i aI o_o:
¢ £l.5 billion to new gigafactoriesconsolidation and scale, to deliver so our automotive industrybetter returns for UK savers and leads the worldgreater productive investment for
UK PLC. We will also undertake a
* £2.5 billion to rebuildreview of the pensions landscape our steel industryto consider what further steps are needed to improve pension
* £l billion to accelerate theoutcomes and increase investment deployment of carbon capturein UK markets.
¢ £5OO million to support theBusiness taxation manufacturing of green hydrogen. The business tax regime matters for investors. It is not just the rates of
Labour will also act to increasetax that matter, but also certainty.
investment from pension funds inUnder the Conservatives there
UK markets. We will adopt reformshas been constant chopping and to ensure that workplace pensionchanging - corporation tax has schemes take advantage ofchanged 26 times - and multiple
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24wy,
I a
Ax;
~ ~~w)
-f SS.- aaeey -¥/ 4 ty A~<.
p, -_
4-;
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24fiscal events have made drasticla bour Wi II stop changes often at little notice. the chaos fe nd!
Labour will stop the chaos, and turn the page with a strategicturn the Page approach that gives certainty andwith @I strateg IC allows long-term planning. We are committed to one major fiscalO Oproach that event a year, giving families andgives certal nty businesses due warning of tax and spending policies. We will publishand allows longa roadmap for business taxation forl the next parliament which will allow term pla Nn NG businesses to plan investments with confidence.-EEE
Labour will cap corporation tax at the current level of 25 per cent, the lowest in the G7, for the entire parliament, and we will act if tax changes in other countries pose a risk to UK competitiveness. We willhigh street and online giants, retain a permanent fullexpensing -_ better incentivise investment, system for capital investment andtackle empty properties and the annual investment allowancesupport entrepreneurship.
for small business. And we will give firms greater clarity on whatEconomic infrastructure qualifies for allowances to improve - Britain is grinding to a halt. Rail business investment decisions. cancellations are at record levels, energy prices have risen faster
The current business rates systemhere than in any other country in disincentivises investment, creates I Western Europe, and not a single uncertainty and places an unduereservoir has been built in the last burden on our high streets. In3O years. This is not an accident.
England, Labour will replace theConservative chaos has seen major business rates system, SO we canprojects abandoned, decades-long raise the same revenue but in adelays, cost overruns, uncertainty fairer way. This new system willfor supply chains, and our level the playing field between theinfrastructure crumbling.
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 3]We need to fo rgeThe current planning regime. acts as a major brake on ahead with Neweconomic growth. Labour will. make the changes we need to roads, rd I lways, forge ahead with new roads, lrailways, reservoirs, and other reservol [S, CO ndnationally significant infrastructure.
other nationa I lyWe will set out new national policy. astatements, make major projects
S IQ a) ifica ntfaster and cheaper by slashing infra structurered tape, and build support for developments by ensuring communities directly benefit.
We will also update national planning policy to ensure the planning system meets the needs of a modern economy, making it easier to build laboratories, digital infrastructure, and gigafactories.;; Labour will ensure economic
Labour will end this chaos by.
regulation supports growth developing a ten-year infrastructure and investment, promotes strategy, aligned with our industrialcompetition, works for consumers, strategy and regional development..
ana;; and enables innovation.
priorities, including improving rail connectivity across the north ofIn an ever more connected world,
England. The strategy will guideBritain's communication network is investment plans and give thealso vital. Under the Conservatives, private sector certainty aboutinvestment in 5G is falling behind the project pipeline. We will workother countries and the rollout of closely with business to map andgigabit broadband has been slow.
address the delivery challengesLabour will make a renewed push to we face. We will create a newfulfil the ambition of full gigabit and
National Infrastructure and Service - pqtional 5G coverage by 2O3O.
Transformation Authority, bringing together existing bodies, to setRoyal Mail remains a key part strategic infrastructure prioritiesof the UK's infrastructure. Labour and oversee the design, scope, will ensure that any proposed and delivery of projects. takeover is robustly scrutinised
32 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24and that appropriate guaranteessoaring cost of car insurance.
are forthcoming that protectAnd, as set out in our automotive the interests of the workforce, sector plan, Labour will support customers and the United Kingdom, the transition to electric vehicles including the need to maintainby accelerating the roll out of a comprehensive universalcharge points, giving certainty service obligation. to manufacturers by restoring the phase-out date of 2O3O for new cars
Labour will also explore newwith internal combustion engines, business and governance models -_ qnd supporting buyers of secondfor Royal Mail so that workers andhand electric cars by standardising customers who rely on Royal Mailthe information supplied on the services can have a stronger voice -_ condition of batteries.
in the governance and strategic; I direction of the company. Labour will overhaul Britain's railways. Fourteen years of
A modern transport networkConservative neglect have failed
Rebuilding Britain meanspassengers, businesses and modernising our transporttaxpayers. We will put passengers infrastructure. Our road network is at the heart of the service by plagued by long-promised projects reforming the railways and bringing that are never delivered. Thethem into public ownership. We potholes cratering our roads arewill do this as contracts with a visible sign of the decline afterexisting operators expire or are l4 years of Conservative rule. broken through a failure to deliver, without costing taxpayers a penny
Cars remain by far the mostin compensation. Great British popular form of transport. LabourRailways will deliver a unified system will maintain and renew ourthat focuses on reliable, affordable, road network, to ensure it serveshigh-quality, and efficient services; drivers, cyclists and other roadalong with ensuring safety and users, remains safe, and tacklesaccessibility. It will be responsible for congestion. We will fix an additional investment, dayto-day operational one million potholes acrossdelivery and innovations and
England in each year of the nextimprovements for passengers, parliament, funded by deferringworking with publicly-owned rail the A27 bypass, which is pooroperators in Wales and Scotland.
value for money. Labour will further I Mayors will have a role in designing support drivers by tackling thethe services in their areas. There
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 33Ra":
°',4 iM 44” ihe j mial will be a duty to promote and grow give local communities in England the use of rail freight. Open access control over routes and schedules.
operators are an important partder th of the rail system and will haveUnder the eesned an ongoing role. Labour will alsoFonte yond; na Swit, create a tough new passengerragmente os Ine ane watchdog, focused on drivingsoncte toed wi an a" a.
up standards. speak to and plan with each other.
Labour will give mayors the power
Local communities have lostto create unified and integrated control over their bus routes. transport systems, allowing for more
Fares have increased, routes haveseamless journeys, and to promote disappeared, and services areactive travel networks. Labour will unreliable. Building on the work ofalso develop a long-term strategy
Labour mayors, we will reform thefor transport, ensuring transport broken system through new powers _ infrastructure can be delivered for local leaders to franchise localefficiently and on time. Labour will bus services, and we will lift the ban secure the UK aviation industry's on municipal ownership. This willlong-term future, including through
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24promoting sustainable aviationreduce micromanagement fuels, and encouraging airspacewith a mission-driven approach.
modernisation.
Regulators are currently
Driving innovationill-equipped to deal with the
Delivering growth and raisingdramatic development of new productivity depend on freshtechnologies, which often cut thinking and new ideas. Britainacross traditional industries has many cutting-edge businesses, and sectors. Labour will create but innovation needs to bea new Regulatory Innovation Office, converted into commercial success _ bringing together existing functions in every corner of our country. across government. This office will
Labour will make Britain the besthelp regulators update regulation, place to start and grow a business. speed up approval timelines, and coordinate issues that span
We will ensure our industrialexisting boundaries. Labour will strategy supports the development ensure the safe development and of the Artificial Intelligence (Al)use of Al models by introducing sector, removes planning barriersbinding regulation on the handful to new datacentres. And we willof companies developing the create a National Data Library tomost powerful Al models and by bring together existing researchbanning the creation of sexually programmes and help deliverexplicit deepfakes.
data-driven public services, whilst maintaining strong safeguards and Labour will support diverse business ensuring all of the public benefit. models which bring innovation and new products to the market. This
Labour will scrap short fundingincludes the cooperative sector, cycles for key R&D institutions inand we will aim to double the size favour of ten-year budgets thatof the UK's cooperative and allow meaningful partnershipsmutuals sector. We will work with the with industry tokeep the UK atthe -_ sector to address the barriers they forefront of global innovation. Weface, such as accessing finance.
will work with universities to support spinouts; and work with industry to Support for small business ensure start-ups have the accessand the self-employed to finance they need to grow. WeLabour's plan for economic will also simplify the procurementgrowth has been developed for process to support innovation and alll UK businesses. But small firms,
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 35La bour Wi II getaccess capital. We will also..--~reform procurement rules to
Britain buildinggive them greater access.. to government contracts.
again, creatingY: The Post Office is an essential jobs OCrOssservice in communities across
Eng la nd, withthe country. Labour will look for.
viteways to strengthen the Post Office l.5 eal I I lon NEWnetwork, in consultation with sub-postmasters, trade unions homes Over theand customers, and support the next ele) lia mentdevelopment of new products, services and business models, such as banking hubs, that will eehelp reinvigorate the high street.
We will also ensure justice and compensation are delivered swiftly for those sub-postmasters shamefully affected by the Horizon
IT scandal.
entrepreneurs, and the selfemployed face unique challenges. Get Britain building again
That is why, in partnership, LabourThe dream of homeownership has developed a plan for smallis now out of reach for too many businesses - the lifeblood ofyoung people. The Conservatives communities and high streetshave failed to act even though the across the country. housing crisis is well known to be;; one of the country’s biggest barriers
We will take action on lateto growth. Labour will get Britain payments to ensure smallbuilding again, creating jobs across businesses and the self-employedEngland, with l.5 million new homes are paid on time. We will improveover the next parliament.
guidance and remove barriers to exporting for small businesses. We will immediately update the
Reform of the British Business Bank, - National Policy Planning Framework including a stronger mandate toto undo damaging Conservative support growth in the regions andchanges, including restoring nations, will make it easier for small © mandatory housing targets. We and medium sized enterprises towill take tough action to ensure that
36 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24aes;7 » Me4
Lea-:“Ges e
4, y{-% 2 eTIs,8) ane é<y:;. lah ah SE
£erN ¥ iy e \ \:
)a* efES
PX “ May I ay R TMftroI: 4
» y; fy y.
j ‘7! i l]-~ - planning authorities have upto-land wherever possible, and date Local Plans and reform andfast-tracking approval of urban strengthen the presumption inbrownfield sites. But brownfield favour of sustainable develooment. development alone will not be
Labour will support local authorities © enough to meet our housing need.
by funding additional planningbouritac; officers, through increasing the, OUnS een c Ocriad rate of the stamp duty surchargethe green elt whicas serve paid by nonUK residents. We willEngland's on one nae ve ensure local communities continue OVS" many eCaes. a No ae to shape housebuilding in theirConservatives, orto, elt land Is area, but where necessary Labourpean enener _ cee ement will not be afraid to make full useut ‘a va y aL linn or h of intervention powers to build theSPEC ative ousebuilding, Without houses we needchanging its purpose or general, extent, Labour will take a more
Labour will take a brownfieldstrategic approach to greenbelt first approach, prioritising theland designation and release to development of previously usedbuild more homes in the right
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24-~oe
AP:. " >~.:
bl ie I ittRESA
PI elil i AUtny aN)was
Se PT.
LNA: A ee i! mm")Htaay atl iN he‘LiAY Nps I et Ay
~~: nit Lineal; Vinpeeel I places. The release of lower quality ona larger than local scale so
‘grey belt’ land will be prioritisedwe will introduce effective new and we will introduce ‘golden rules’ mechanisms for cross-boundary to ensure development benefitsstrategic planning. Labour will communities and nature. require all Combined and Mayoral hio with IileadAuthorities to strategically plan for
In partners Ip wit ocanede! shousing growth in their areas. We and eee Seen, will give Combined Authorities new government. una a new vedplanning powers along with new generation of new on INSpIrefreedoms and flexibilities to make by the proud legacy of the l945better use of grant funding.
Labour government. Alongside urban extensions and regeneration Labour will further reform projects, these will form partcompulsory purchase of a series of large-scale newcompensation rules to improve communities across England. land assembly, speed up site delivery, and deliver housing,
Housing need in England cannotinfrastructure, amenity, and be met without planning for growth - transport benefits in the public
38 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24interest. We will take steps tola bour Wi II ensure that for specific types:
of development schemes, support firstlandowners are awarded fairtime buyers compensation rather than inflated prices based on the prospect ofwho strugg le to planning permission. save for el la rge
Labour will deliver the biggestll increase in social and affordabledesposit, with housebuilding in a generation. Welower mortgage will strengthen planning obligations to ensure new developmentscosts provide more affordable homes; make changes to the Affordable
Homes Programme to ensure that it delivers more homes from existing funding; and support councils and housing associations to build their capacity and make a greater contribution to affordable housing supply. Labour will prioritise the building of new social rented homes of homes affected by nutrient and better protect our existingneutrality without weakening stock by reviewing the increasedenvironmental protections.
right to buy discounts introduced in:.
2Ol2 and increasing protections onLabour will work with local... authorities to give first-time newly-built social housing.; buyers the first chance to buy
Labour wants exemplaryhomes and end the farce of development to be the normentire developments being sold not the exception. We will takeoff to international investors steps to ensure we are buildingbefore houses are even built. And more high-quality, well-designed, we will introduce a permanent, and sustainable homes andcomprehensive mortgage creating places that increaseguarantee scheme, to support climate resilience and promotefirst-time buyers who struggle to nature recovery. We will implement save for a large deposit, with lower solutions to unlock the buildingmortgage costs.
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 39Economic growthAt the centre of our approach is across the countrya new statutory requirement for
Every town and city across theLocal Growth Plans that cover country has a vital contributiontowns and cities across the country.
to make to our economy. ButLocal leaders will work with major too many areas have been heldemployers, universities, colleges, back because decisions are oftenand industry bodies to produce taken in Westminster, and not bylong-term plans that identify local leaders who understandgrowth sectors and put in place local ambitions and strengths. the programmes and infrastructure
This means we fail to make thethey need to thrive. These will align most of the contribution everyonewith our national industrial strategy.
can make, hampering ECONOMICLabour will review the governance growth. So, Labour will transfer.; arrangements for Combined power out of Westminster, andAuthorities to unblock decision into our communities, with.... aemaking. We will provide greater landmark devolution legislationflexibility with integrated settlements to take back control. for Mayoral Combined Authorities
In England, Labour willthat can show exemplary deepen devolution settlementsmanagement of public money. On for existing Combined Authorities. housing and planning we will seek
We will also widen devolution toto consolidate powers to allow for more areas, encouraging localimproved decision making.
authorities to come together andOur approach will require take on new powers. Towns andpartnership with local authorities.
cities will be able to take hold of the I gcaq} government is facing acute tools they need to pursue growth, -_ financial challenges because create jobs, and improve livingof the Conservatives’ economic standards. Local areas will bemismanagement which sent able to gain new powers overinterest rates soaring, along with transport, adult education andtheir failures on public services. To skills, housing and planning, andprovide greater stability, a Labour employment support. We willgovernment will give councils multiensure those places have theyear funding settlements and end strong governance arrangements, - wasteful competitive bidding. We capacity, and capability torecognise good jobs deliver better deliver, providing central supportservices that local communities where needed. can rely on. Labour will provide
4O Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24capacity and support to councils, la bou l Wi II and will overhaul the local audit system, so taxpayers get bettertra nsfer Dower out value Tor iof Westminster,
Improving public services is.
essential to growing our economyfe nd INtO OUr across the country. Public serviceCommunities workers have a critical role to play, but services are suffering from recruitment and retention crises. ee
Labour will act to improve public service workers’ living standards throughout the parliament, and ensure any independent mechanisms have the confidence of all involved.
level than at the last election in 2Ol9.
Labour will also work with theThe overall level must be properly
Scottish and Welsh Governments, controlled and managed. Failure and the Northern Ireland Executive, to do so reduces the incentives to drive growth across the country. for businesses to train locally. So,
Our industrial strategy willsupport - Labour will reduce net migration.
successful industries across alll nations of the UK. We will reform the points-based immigration system so that it is
A fair and properly managedfair and properly managed, with immigration systemappropriate restrictions on visas,
People who have come to theand by linking immigration and
UK to work make a substantialskills policy. Labour will not tolerate contribution to our economy, employers or recruitment agencies our public services, andabusing the visa system. And our communities. we will not stand for breaches of; employment law. Employers who
But under the Conservatives, flout the rules will be barred from our economy has become overlyhiring workers from abroad.
dependent on workers from abroad to fill skills shortages. As a result, Conservative policy is incoherent, we have seen net migration reach - with decisions on migration, skills record highs; more than triple theand sectoral pay determined in
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 4lI“Ee
P--
I7'\7
I ff)a
Va q
Y..
isolation. Labour will bring joinedup _ lists with no action to train up thinking, ensuring that migrationworkers will come to an end.
to address skills shortages triggers a plan to upskill workers andSupporting people into work improve working conditions in theToo many people are out of work
UK. We will strengthen the Migration OF not earning enough. Long waits
Advisory Committee, and establishfor treatment of health conditions, a framework for joint working with Particularly mental health, are skills bodies across the UK, thecontributing to the rise in economic
Industrial Strategy Council andthe inactivity. Labour will reform
Department for Work and Pensions. @Mployment support so it drives
We will end the long-term reliance - growth and opportunity. Our system on overseas workers in some parts __ Will be underpinned by rights and of the economy by bringing inresponsibilities - people who can workforce and training planswork, should work - and there will be for sectors such as health andconsequences for those who do not social care, and construction. fulfil their obligations.
The days of a sector languishingWe will bring Jobcentre Plus and the endlessly on immigration shortage National Careers Service together
42 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24_5 s KM, Boy "3,7 _. Ai 4 y.’.2 eet
Ji:
wl 7?
-d:{fe--- weA.
a La. iTM to provide a national jobs andimmediate benefit reassessment if careers service, focused on getting it does not work out. We believe the people into work and helping them Work Capability Assessment is not get on at work. We will ensureworking and needs to be reformed the service is responsive to localor replaced, alongside a proper employers, inclusive for all users, plan to support disabled people and works in partnership with other to work.
local services..
One in eight young people are
Labour will work with local areasnot in education, employment, to create plans to support moreor training, with those lacking disabled people and those withgood qualifications and with poor health conditions into work. We will I mental health facing particular devolve funding so local areas can disadvantages. Drawing together shape a joinedup work, health, existing funding and entitlements, and skills offer for local people. We - Labour will establish a youth will tackle the backlog of Accessguarantee of access to training, an to Work claims and give disabledapprenticeship, or support to find people the confidence to startwork for all l8- to 2lyear-olds, to working without the fear of anbring down the number of young
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 43¥
%of i),)yy}‘a
Ww): #
<se '.
people who are not learning orthe workplace improve the lives earning. We will also guarantee two - of working people and bring weeks’ worth of work experiencesubstantial economic benefits.
for every young person, andBritain’s outdated employment improve careers advice inlaws are not fit for the modern schools and colleges. economy, and recent Conservative legislation has fuelled hostility and
We will work with the Scottishand confrontation leading to the worst
Welsh Governments, and Mayorsperiod in industrial relations since and Combined Authorities inthe l98Os.
England, to ensure all aspects of our new approach to Jobcentre Plus For too many people a job does and employment support partnernot offer the route out of poverty effectively with devolved provision, __ it should: either because work is to offer the best opportunities forinsecure, inflexible, or low paid; people right across the country. or because people face barriers when trying to move into a better
Making work payjob. Responsible businesses face
Greater inwork security, betterbeing undercut when rights are not pay, and more autonomy inenforced properly.
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24ee 5
Britains outdated employment laws are not fit for the modern economy.
Labour will implement our plan to
¢O.
Make Work Pay: Delivering a New Deal.3 for Working People
Labour will stop the chaos and turn to ensure employment rights are the page to create a partnershipupheld. These changes will improve between business and tradethe lives of working people across unions, by implementing ‘Labour'sthe entire UK.
Plan to Make Work Fay: DeliveringLabour will also make sure the a New Deal for Working People’ in_..,; reweminimum wage is a genuine full - introducing legislation within.... living wage. We will change the lOO days. We will consult fully with,.
a; remit of the independent Low businesses, workers, and civil societyLo,.
Pay Commission so for the first on how to put our plans into practice.".
wae. time it accounts for the cost of before legislation is passed. This will..;.. weliving. Labour will also remove the include banning exploitative zeroree
“wediscriminatory age bands, so all hours contracts; ending fire and.;,.. adults are entitled to the same rehire; and introducing basic rights. oo minimum wage, delivering a pay from day one to parental leave,.,;, rise to hundreds of thousands of sick pay, and protection from unfair.. workers across the UK.
dismissal. We will strengthen the collective voice of workers, including Labour will stop the chaos, turn through their trade unions, andthe page, and kickstart economic create a Single Enforcement Bodygrowth by reforming our economy.
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 454 bos7 eo 4°;- Copa ~
4) SANN Ww XD*
E\PR_-;°
--y
IAhoy
<Vem el
6el
/a I
4--
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24© Set up Great British Energy to cut bills for good
© Energy independence from dictators like Putin
© 65O, OOO new high-quality jobs
© Warmer homes to slash fuel poverty
© Water companies forced to clean up our rivers
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 47OREO)RR.
mea Te. \ ’ We
5te. ’'sSN. UT LAA
OR fcoy bia 4} AR
/ ve BS ie TL,; ),:
‘ i BES Hi) a, y7:
aS2 3i>
<< Ve er &:
48 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24The climate and nature crisisThe clea N is the greatest long-term+.
global challenge that we face. energy tra Nsition
The clean energy transition represents a huge opportunityrepresents eS).
to generate growth, tackle theh UQe Op portu N Ity costof-living crisis and make
Britain energy independent onceto generate again. That is why clean energy by
2O3O is Labour’s second mission. g rowth, tackle the costof-living
The Conservatives have failedan to grasp opportunities in thisCrIsSIS O nd Mma ke area for two related reasons.]]
First, because they simply do notBrita IN Ene rOy accept that economic growth, I nde bende nt energy security, lower bills, and.
addressing climate change can be ONCE AQaAIN complementary. Second, because they are ideologically opposed to using the role of the state, including public investment, to guarantee that they are.
The damage done by l4 years ofand wealth that the transition offers, chaotic ‘sticking plaster’ policiesBritain is losing out.
was exposed when Putin invadedBut it is not too late to stop the
Ukraine. The cost of fossil fuelchaos and turn the page.
energy on the international market rocketed. The Conservatives’ banWe have tremendous untapped on new onshore wind, failure toadvantages: our long coastbuild new nuclear power stations, line, high winds, shallow waters, and decision to scrap investmentuniversities, and skilled offshore in home insulation landed Britishworkforce combined with our families with amongst the highest - extensive technological and energy bills in Europe. That is justengineering capabilities. With a one way we are paying the price. serious industrial strategy and a
While countries around the worldgenuine partnership between are racing ahead to claim the jobs the public and private sectors,
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 49tallia; a
-“-
-_4 a I& we can make Britain a cleanchanging on policy, harness clean energy superpower. power to boost our energy security, bil take decisiand invest in home insulation
Lal our wl take ecisive action toupgrades. We will save families
Seize Tonaeee oppohundreds of pounds on their nae 8 ape markets, sea usebills, not just in the short term, pu ic investment to crowd inbut for good.
private funding. At the heart of our approach will be our GreenWe will provide leadership at home
Prosperity Plan where, in partnership so we can influence others to with business through our National ensure every country plays their
Wealth Fund, we will invest in thepart in meeting our collective industries of the future. Our planobligations to future generations.
will create 65O, OOO jobs acrosshlalle th the country by 2O3O. At home we will also tackle the
Conservatives’ nature emergency,
We will end the chaoticincluding the unforgivable pollution
5O Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24improve access to nature, promote Anew Energy Independence Act will biodiversity, and protect ourestablish the framework for Labour's landscapes and wildlife. energy and climate policies.
Labour understands the roadLabour will end a decade of ahead. We have been clear that this dithering that has seen the transition presents an opportunityConservatives duck decisions on to create good jobs, with no community left behind, and support well-paying jobs in existing and future industries. The ConservativesSIR PATRICK propose an alternative course. AVALLANCE denial of reality; delaying action;° increasing costs for Britain; exposingFormer Chief us to insecurity; and a failure to winScientific Adviser the jobs of the future. They tried this chaotic approach in the l97Os“«.- and 8Os, and communities are stillalate nel mission fou ean. power by 2O3O is achievable scarred by what happened. That isope the choice facing Britain. and should be prioritised.
We desperately need to end
Clean power by 2O3Othe era of high energy bills,
Families and businesses will haveexcessive carbon emissions lower bills for good, from a zero-and energy insecurity by carbon electricity system. We haveaccelerating the transition chosen this mission not because itto clean, homegrown energy.
is easy, but because working peopleBritain can lead on this by can never again be left vulnerabletreating this mission like to dictators like Putin. the vaccine challenge. We can be the innovators and
To deliver our clean power mission, the implementers, helping
Labour will work with the privateourselves and exporting our sector to double onshore wind, solutions worldwide. But if we triple solar power, and quadruplechoose to go slowly, others offshore wind by 2O3O. We will investwill provide the answers, and in carbon capture and storage, ultimately we'll end up buying hydrogen and marine energy, andthese solutions rather than ensure we have the long-termselling them.” energy storage our country needs.
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 5lLa bour Wi II createtransition in the North Sea that. recognises the proud history of our
Q new DU blicly-offshore industry and the brilliance of its workforce, particularly in owned com Pa NY, Scotland and the North East of
Great BritishEngland, and the ongoing role of
Energy. It will beoil and gas in our energy mix.
We will embrace the future of ener owned by theproduction and storage whichia
B ritis h peop lewill make use of existing offshore. infrastructure and the skills of our e) nd de I IVeroffshore workforce. Labour will not
Dower bac k torevoke existing licences and we will soepartner with business and workers the British peopleto manage our existing fields for the entirety of their lifespan. Crucially, oil and gas production in the North Sea
Iwill be with us for decades to come, and the North Sea will be managed in a way that does not jeopardise jobs. And our offshore workers will lead the world in the industries nuclear power. We will ensure theof the future.
long-term security of the sector, We will not issue new licences to extending the lifetime of existingexplore new fields because they plants, and we will get Hinkley Point - will not take a penny off bills, cannot
C over the line. New nuclear powermake us energy secure, and will stations, such as Sizewell C, andonly accelerate the worsening
Small Modular Reactors, will playclimate crisis. In addition, we will an important role in helping the UK - not grant new coal licences and achieve energy security and clean - will ban fracking for good.
Power while securing thousands ofTo support investment in this plan, good, skilled jobs. Labour will close the loopholes
Labour will maintain a strategicin the windfall tax on oil and gas reserve of gas power stations tocompanies. Companies have guarantee security of supply. We will benefitted from enormous profits ensure a phased and responsiblenot because of their ingenuity or
52 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24- +- x, eel investment, but because of anEnergy. It will be owned by the British energy shock which raised pricespeople and deliver power back to for British families. Labour willthe British people.
ee ne sunset aGreat British Energy will partner
In the Energy Pro ts Levy unt t owith industry and trade unions to end of the next parliament. We will...
SOlh¢the Ibdeliver clean power by coinvesting also Increase the rate ofthe levy by in leading technologies; will hel three percentage points, as well asae..;, support capital-intensive projects; removing the unjustifiably generous.
f5and will deploy local energy
Investment O owances. La ourproduction to benefit communities will also retain the Energy Security.
IMechaniacross the country. To support this, nvestment Mechanism. Labour will capitalise Great British
Switch on Great British EnergyEnergy a £8.3 billion, over the
To drive forward investment in clean, next parliament.
home-grown energy production, The company will create jobs and
Labour will create a new publicly-build supply chains in every corner owned company, Great Britishof the UK. Scotland will be the
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24-. " “
\ Owe
Heze powerhouse of our clean energyto ensure local people benefit mission, with Great British Energydirectly from this energy production.
headquartered there.
Energy system reform
Local power generation is anUnder the Conservatives, the broken essential part of the energy mixenergy market has let customers and reduces pressures on thedown. The government has allowed transmission grid. Labour willscandalous abuses on their watch, deploy more distributed production including poor customer service, capacity through our Local Power - companies going to the wall with
Plan. Great British Energy willthe costs falling on billpayers, partner with energy companies, and the mass forced installation local authorities, and cooperatives of pre-payment meters.
to install thousands of clean power projects, through a combinationLabour will ensure a much tougher of onshore wind, solar, andsystem of regulation that puts hydropower projects. We will invite I consumers first and attracts the communities to come forwardinvestment needed to cut bills. Too with projects, and work with localmuch of the burden of the bill is on leaders and devolved governments standing charges and we will work
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24with the regulator to reduce them. la bou as N ationa I
We will strengthen the regulator to:
ensure it can hold companies toWea Ith Fu nd WI I account for wrongdoing, requirelll higher standards of performance, directly Invest IN and ensure there is automaticports, hyd TOge N customer compensation for failure.::
and industrial
The national grid has become' the single biggest obstacle to theCl uste rs IN Eve ry deployment of cheap, cleanpower CO/smer of the generation and the electrification of industry. With grid connectionCOU ntry dates not being offered until the late 2O3Os, important business and infrastructure investment is beinga!
stalled or lost overseas. Labour will work with industry to upgrade our national transmission infrastructure and rewire Britain.
High-quality jobsWe will reward clean energy
As Britain becomes a clean energy developers with a British Jobs superpower, Labour is determined Bonus, allocating up to £5OO million that we will create new high-quality per year from 2O26, to incentivise jobs, working with business andfirms who offer good jobs, terms trade unions, as we manage theand conditions and build their transition. We will rebuild supplymanufacturing supply chains in our chains at home. And, as the firstindustrial heartlands, coastal areas, major economy to transition to aand energy communities.
clean-energy system, we will export the technologies of the future. Labour will end the injustice of the
Mineworkers’ Pension Scheme.
Labour's National Wealth Fund willWe will review the unfair surplus directly invest in ports, hydrogenarrangements and transfer the and industrial clusters in everyInvestment Reserve Fund back to corner of the country. We willmembers, so that the mineworkers also secure the future of Britain’swho powered our country receive a automotive and steel industries. fairer pension.
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 55La bour Will savesupport investment in insulation waeand other improvements such as fa MI I lIeS hu nd redssolar panels, batteries and low carbon heating to cut bills. We will of DOU nds, slashpartner with combined authorities, fuel Dove rty, local and devolved governments,.. to roll out this plan. Labour will
O nd get B rita INalso work with the private sector, including banks and building back On track tosocieties, to provide further private meet our climatefinance to accelerate home upgrades and low carbon heating.
ta rgets. Our pla NWe will ensure homes in the private 'rented sector meet minimum
WI! mean goodenergy efficiency standards by skilled jobs for2O3O, saving renters hundreds of: pounds per year. Nobody will be tradespeople INforced to rip out their boiler as a result of our plans.
every part of theP
Labour will save families hundreds
COU ntryof pounds, slash fuel poverty, and get Britain back on track to meet our climate targets. Our plan will mean good skilled jobs for tradespeople in every part of the country.
Warm homes planAccelerating to net zero
The energy shock of recentBritish industry is also held back by years has highlighted the urgenthigh electricity costs, which has often importance of improving energymade investing here uncompetitive.
efficiency in British homes. LabourLabour's clean energy mission will will invest an extra £6.6 billion overdrive down those bills, making British the next parliament, doublingbusinesses internationally competitive the existing planned governmentwhile our National Wealth Fund investment, to upgrade five million supports the most energy intensive homes to cut bills for families. sectors to decarbonise.
The Warm Homes Plan will offerLabour supports the introduction grants and low interest loans toof a carbon border adjustment
56 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24wytt" -Iy F ers Ba he regpeared,>CF ae;;_a- «Sl a. a mechanism. This will protect British I age. Labour will make the UK the industries as we decarbonise, green finance capital of the world, prevent countries from dumpingmandating Ukregulated financial lower-quality goods into Britishinstitutions - including banks, asset markets, and support the UK tomanagers, pension funds, and meet our climate objectives. insurers - and FTSE lOO companies
Labour will ensure the institutionalto develop one mermen vee framework for policy making reflects transition plans t at align with the. l.5°C goal of the Paris Agreement.
our commitments to reach net zero and meet our carbon budgets. The. oe., Improving resilience
Conservatives’ decision to preventina for the f he Bank of Enaland aivina duePreparing for the future not only the;; g; QIVING; means tackling the climate and consideration to climate change in.;; nature emergencies, but also its mandates will be reversed...
adapting to the changes they will
Britain's world-leading financialbring to our environment. Without services industry has a major role to action, flooding and coastal play in mobilising trillions of pounds - erosion will pose greater risks to in private capital to address thelives, livelihoods and people's greatest long-term challenge of our wellbeing. The Conservatives’ poor
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24"iil a ry 3. a; a
3 pS.\, 4:\s a. Nega. o
£~. ine wieenusere yee
Eire ss Rese I
Ss Bo oa AS SES eh Ba ene ths Boe PEE
Oe:, ti risk Management, and a disjointed - in the world. Labour will deliver for approach across government and nature, taking action to meet our regulators have left BritainEnvironment Act targets, and will badly exposed. work in partnership with civil society, communities and business to restore
Labour will improve resilienceand protect our natural world.
and preparation across central government, local authorities, local 4S part of our plans to improve communities, and emergencyresponsible access to nature, Labour services. This includes formallywill create nine new National River working with all stakeholders inWalks, one In each region of England, the Fire and Rescue services toand establish three new National inform policy and establish national Forests in England, whilst planting standardsmillions of trees and creating new woodlands. Labour will expand
Protecting naturenature-rich habitats such as
The climate crisis has acceleratedwetlands, peat bogs and forests so the nature crisis. Whilst Britain enjoys - families can explore and wildlife can remarkable natural beauty, thethrive, including on public land. Labour
Conservatives have left Britain one of is committed to reducing waste by the most nature-depleted countries -§ moving toa circular economy.
58 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24Brita I ans coasts, persistent law breakers. We will. impose automatic and severe rive rs, O nd la kesfines for wrongdoing and ensure lindependent monitoring of are being polluted teenie by illegal sewage: Supporting British farmers d um e) I NQ. La bou lLabour recognises that food security 'lhis national security. That is why we will put failingwill champion British farming whilst water com Da niesprotecting the environment. We. will set a target for half of all food
U nder specialpurchased across the public sector to be locally produced or certified
MeEQsSuUresto higher environmental standards.
to clean UpWe will introduce a land-use framework and make environment
OUr waterland management schemes work for farmers and nature. And we will work with farmers and scientists on ameasures to eradicate Bovine TB, protecting livelinoods, so that we
Clean watercan end the ineffective badger cull.
Britain’s coasts, rivers, and lakes are being polluted by illegal sewageStronger animal welfare dumping. The Conservatives have - Labour will improve animal turned a blind eye and weakenedwelfare. We will ban trail hunting rather than strengthened regulation, @Nd the import of hunting trophies.
with serious damage being doneWe will end puppy smuggling and to our countryside, our tourismfarming, along with the use of snare industry, and people’s health. traps. And we will partner with scientists, industry, and civil society
Labour will put failing wateras we work towards the phasing out companies under special measures of qnimal testing.
to clean up our water. We will give regulators new powers to block the - Labour will end the climate and payment of bonuses to executives energy chaos, turn the page on l4 who pollute our waterways andyears of failed policies, and make bring criminal charges againstBritain a clean energy superpower.
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 59‘i
-_*s.' A), eee ES *
4wyEy. GroueT,:
a 7 a: e
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24© Crack down on antisocial behaviour with more neighbourhood police
© Tough new penalties for offenders
© Aplan to get knives off our streets
© Aspecialist rape unit in every police force
© Anew network of
Young Futures hubslenopeao as, Ca: _ -J
~_ae. a as TM i Isl atr
>py) Far\ wt _,
”\4
7p I agen tes areey, wwew /. bBe
Arms‘LOGKSSor 5 [GEIS oRa SAODO f Cadac
<Y SoeOGRE SSXQASESF a NeFh Ww? LOOOSOOGE’ Oia mY S*ASS SC CO oa:, COO, Soe ee
\£4, we F VOSS SE SOGE CON. A L
/“Zt< 3rr) "Ul~~Gal/
~? ys)
Nour: sister, aunt and campaigner for Raneem’s Law
“On the night my niece Raneem Oudeh and her mother were murdered they called 999 not once, not twice, not three times, but four times. No one came. Raneem faced abuse, stalking and threats to kill from her expartner.
She repeatedly asked the police for help. But nothing was done. No woman should ever be ignored like this. And this was preventable. It’s the result of police cuts and the Conservatives serving themselves. As Director of Public
Prosecutions Keir gave victims a voice in the justice system. I’m backing
Labour's plan to halve levels of violence against women and girls within a decade.”
62 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24Labour has a straightforward vision for policing and criminal justice. When you call the police, they should come.
When you report a crime, it should be properly investigated no matter who you are, or where you live
Labour has a straightforward vision - blights our town and city centres.
for policing and criminal justice. Fewer criminals are being caught; and punished. More victims are
When you call the police, theybeing let down.
should come. When you report a crime, it should be properlyThis is not an accident, but the investigated no matter who you are, result of Conservative choices or where you live. Police should have over the last l4 years. Community the trust of communities. Victimspolicing has been downgraded, must have faith that justice willwith neighbourhood officers pulled be delivered, and criminals will beoff the beat to plug shortages punished. Prisons should notelsewhere, weakening connections be academies of crime. Thesewith communities they serve. Trust are not outlandish expectations. in the police has been undermined
They are the basics of a safe, by failures in vetting and appalling secure, law-abiding society. misconduct of some officers.
oo, Powers to combat antisocial
Sadly, this vision is a world awaybehaviour and shoplifting have from Britain today. Our sense ofbeen weakened, leaving our town security has been badly eroded. centres exposed. Our justice system
Serious violence is too high. has been allowed to grind
Growing numbers of youngto a halt.
people are drawn into gangs, drug dealing and violence at everThis must change. Labour will earlier ages. Antisocial behaviourrestore neighbourhood policing
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 63i?
oon eae " ys ~
Bee 4 te ere ed\ with thousands of extra officers, Visible neighbourhood policing and we will equip officers withVisible neighbourhood policing the powers they need. We willwas the cornerstone of the British tackle the epidemic of seriousconsent-based model. In too violence, with a greater focus onmany areas it has been eroded, prevention, including by holdingleaving the police a reactive service those companies and executivesfocused on crisis response, cashing in on knife crime personally rather than preventing crime.
to account. We will no longer.
tolerate the violence againstLabour will introduce a new women and girls that stains ourNeighbourhood Policing Guarantee, society. And we will reform therestoring patrols to our town justice system to put the needs ofcentres by recruiting thousands victims first, tackle the prisons crisis of new police officers, police and cut reoffending. and community support officers, and special constables.
In short, Labour will stop theCommunities and residents will
Conservative chaos and returnhave a named officer to turn to law and order to our streets. when things go wrong.
64 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24These new recruits will be paid foryoung lives. It is a national crisis, by tackling waste through a newrequiring urgent action. Yet, under
Police Efficiency and Collaboration - the Conservatives, too often when programme for England anda teenager is found with a knife,
Wales. The programme willnothing happens, and carrying set nation-wide standards fora knife becomes normalised.
procurement and establish shared services and specialist functions to drive down costs. GAVIN
Cracking down on antisocial behaviourTHOMAS
Antisocial behaviour is not merely aFormer Detective
‘low-level’ nuisance. It hits the poorest°°
”enChief Superintendent communities hardest and, if left.
unchecked, leads to more seriousand Former President offending. Yet, the Conservativesof the Police weakened enforcement powers. Superintendents
Labour will fix this by introducing newse
Respect Orders - powers to banAssociation persistent adult offenders from town centres, which will stamp out issues“Labour has serious and such as public drinking and drugcredible plans to take back use. Fly-tiopers and vandals will alsoour streets, with ambitious be forced to clean up the mess theymissions to halve serious have created. violence - including knife,«cs; crime - finally tackle the
With shoplifting soaring,;;;;;; scrouge of violence against retail workers increasingly find.6., women and girls, and rebuild themselves in harm’s way. Labour;;; a;.; public confidence in policing will scrap the effective immunity;; eaeby getting bobbies back on for some shoplifting introduced by;. the beat. These plans will the Conservatives and create a;; wesrequire us to do things new specific offence for assaults on;; differently and to work hard shopworkers that will protect them;,; to offer better protection to from threats and violence. ia our communities. But they
Knife crime action plancan only happen if you vote
Knife crime has been rising for afor them.” decade, claiming far too many
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 65To get knives off our streets Labour will ban ninja swords, lethal zombie-style blades and machetes, and strengthen rules to prevent online sales
There are virtually no services forLabour will intervene earlier to stop vulnerable teenagers at risk ofyoung people being drawn into being drawn into a life of violence. crime, creating a new Young Futures
The next Labour government willprogramme with a network of hubs change this. We aim to halve knifereaching every community. These crime in a decade. hubs will have youth workers, mental;; health support workers, and careers
Labour will end the practice of; advisers on hand to support young empty WAFRINGS by Ensuring knifepeople’s mental health and avoid carrying triggers rapid intervention - s.,,, being drawn into crime.
and tough consequences. Every young person caught in possession We will not wait for those at risk to of a knife will be referred toa Youth come forward. Local prevention
Offending Team and will receivepartnerships will identify young a mandatory plan to preventpeople who could be drawn into reoffending, with penalties including violence and intervene. And to offer curfews, tagging, and custody foryoung people a pathway out of the most serious cases. violence, we will place youth workers; and mentors in A&E units and Pupil
To get knives off our streets LabourReferral Units, funded by full recovery will ban ninja swords, lethal zombie- of the cost of firearm licensing.
style blades and machetes, and strengthen rules to prevent onlineLabour will also introduce a new sales. Executives of onlineoffence of criminal exploitation companies that flout these rules will of children, to go after the gangs be personally held to accountwho are luring young people into through tough sanctions. violence and crime.
66 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24: Wet raePT I:
Tackling violence againstwomen - normally reserved for terrorists and and girlsorganised crime.
For too long, violence against women and girls has been ignored. Prosecution rates for rape are
Our landmark mission to halveshamefully low with many victims violence against women and girls dropping out of the justice system ina decade will require a national + when faced with years of delays.
effort. We will use every government Labour will fast-track rape cases, tool available to target perpetrators with specialist courts at every and address the root causes ofCrown Court location in England abuse and violence. and Wales.
That starts with tougherVictims deserve better support.
enforcement and protection. WithBuilding on the success of the
Labour, there will be specialistapproach adopted by Labour Police rape and sexual offences teams inand Crime Commissioners, we will every police force. The most prolific - introduce domestic abuse experts and harmful perpetrators will bein 999 control rooms so that victims relentlessly targeted, using tacticscan talk directly to a specialist, and
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24l ang2) I: io ensure there is a legal advocateStalking Protection Orders and in every police force area togive women the right to know the advise victims from the moment of identity of online stalkers. Spiking report to trial. is a devastating crime for victims, leaving many women feeling
Violence and abuse againstvulnerable when they go out.
women and girls does not comeLabour will introduce a new criminal from nowhere. Misogyny is one root offence for spiking to help police cause, and therefore Labour willbetter respond to this crime.
ensure schools address misogyny and teach young people aboutWe will strengthen the rights and healthy relationships and consent. - protections available to women in
We will ensure police forces haveco-habiting couples, as well as for the powers they need to track and - whistleblowers in the workplace, tackle the problem. including on sexual harassment.
Stalking has not been treatedBetter policing with the seriousness it deserves. Under the Conservatives, poor
Labour will strengthen the use ofpolicing performance has been
68 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24For too long violence against women and girls has been ignored. We will
Use every govern ment tool to ta rget perpetrators and address the root causes of abuse and violence tolerated, with forces spendingaround strip-searching children and years in special measures. Trust inyoung people.
the police has been undermined by the appalling acts of some officers. Fraud accounts for almost two in
Labour will turn the page and raisefive crimes, but the Conservatives standards by reforming the police. Nave failed to respond to the scale of the challenge. Labour will
Labour will give His Majesty'sintroduce a new expanded fraud
Inspectorate of Constabulary, Firestrategy to tackle the full range
& Rescue Services new powers toof threats, including online, public intervene with failing forces. We will - sector and serious fraud. We will introduce mandatory professional - work with technology companies to standards on vetting, checks and __ stop their platforms being exploited misconduct for individual officers; by fraudsters.
and stronger training on racism and violence against women and girls. - Criminals never stop looking for new
Anyone with a history of violenceways to target victims. Police must against women and girls will bechange the way they operate too, barred from the service and we will - with technology and investigative introduce automatic suspensionstechniques keeping pace with if officers are investigated formodern threats. We will work with domestic abuse and sexualnational policing bodies and police offences. Particular care is required _ staff to standardise approaches when investigating children. Labour to procurement, IT, professional will introduce new legal safeguards - standards and training. And we will
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 69& aay atIAN
~tt. ee teawaeSS~~
)2ee ~ Sa ensure the service is organised socharges, cutting bureaucracy, as to enable investment in specialist and improving collaboration.
capabilities, such as digitalWe will make it easier for highforensics, and to more effectivelyperforming police forces to charge tackle cross-border issues suchas domestic abuse suspects to speed serious Organised crime. up the process.
Solving crimeLabour recognises recruitment
Under the Conservatives, challenges, particularly for plummeting charge anddetectives, so we will roll out a direct prosecution rates have emboldened entry scheme for detectives to criminals. Rather than workingboost investigation skills.
together, police and prosecutorsoo. h often engage in a blame game, aes icine that at which lets down victims. puts victims first
After l4 years of neglect, the
Labour will reverse this, driving upcriminal justice system is broken.
the proportion of crimes solvedVictims wait months, sometimes by reducing barriers to bringingyears, for their case to come to trial,
7O Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24unable to move on with their lives. use all relevant powers to build
As an initial step to address thethe prisons so badly needed.
courts backlog, Labour will ensure more prosecutors are available byAS a result of overcrowding, our allowing Associate Prosecutorsprisons are increasingly dangerous, to work on appropriate cases. plagued by drug use and violent disorder - putting prison officers
We will introduce new protectionsin a dangerous position. Far from for victims of crime and persistentbeing places where offenders are antisocial behaviour, by increasing - punished and rehabilitated, prisons the powers of the Victims’are a breeding ground for more
Commissioner, and ensuring victims crime. Prison leavers are more likely can access the information andto reoffend if they do not have the support they need. tools to move away from crime, if. they have nowhere to live and if
Even when criminals are foundthey do not have a job on release.
guilty, the sentences they receive often do not make sense either toLabour will act to reduce victims or the wider public. This isreoffending. We will work with particularly worrying for offencesprisons to improve offenders’ against women and girls. Labour will Qocess to purposeful activity, such carry out a review of sentencing to gg jearning, and ensure they create ensure it is brought up to date. pre-release plans for those leaving
Getting a grip of our prisonscustody. We will support prisons to and reducing reoffendinglink up with local employers and the
Prisons in England and Walesvoluntary sector to get exoffenders are in crisis. he Conservatives’into work. The children of those who failure to build sufficient placesare imprisoned are at far greater has led to overcrowding andrisk of being drawn into crime than chaos. Judges are being advisedtheir peers. We will ensure that those to delay sentencing. Prisoners are YOuNg people are identified and being released early. And feweroffered support to break the cycle.
dangerous criminals are locked; up because of a lack of space. After l4 years of chaotic reorganisations, the national
The Conservatives have failed toprobation service is struggling get prisons built. Labour recognises to keep the public safe. A lack of that prisons are of nationalco-ordination between prisons, importance and therefore willprobation and other local services
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 7].
sha
> y 4.
_ el x. T(rI ron
\IUnder the Conservatives, plummeting charge and prosecution rates have emboldened criminals. Labour will reverse this, driving up the proportion of crimes solved also means prison-leavers areof the Infected Blood Inquiry, and not getting the right support, respond to the findings of the raising the risk that they go straight - Grenfell Inquiry and the Covidl9 back to crime. Inquiry, to ensure swift resolution.
In some areas of the country, Labour will introduce a ‘Hillsborough we have seen Labour MayorsLaw’ which will place a legal duty pioneering a more joined-upof candour on public servants and approach to reduce reoffending. authorities, and provide legal aid
In Greater Manchester, probationfor victims of disasters or stateis linked up with housing andrelated deaths. We will ensure the health services to ensure offenders victims of the appalling Windrush leaving custody receive the support g¢cqndal have their voices heard they need. Labour will conductand the compensation scheme is a strategic review of probationrun effectively, with a new Windrush governance, including considering Ggmmissioner. Labour will also the benefits of devolved models. ensure, through an investigation
Historical injusticesor inquiry, that the truth about the
Under the Conservatives, too many events at Orgreave comes to light.
victims of historical injustices have had insult added to injury by years Labour will stop the chaos that of legal delays. Without justice and lets too many criminals act the truth, victims and their families - with impunity, turn the page with cannot move forward. Labour willstronger policing, and rebuild right this wrong, act on the findings our criminal justice system.
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 73e-
(I oe y we. BREAK DOWN
THE BARRIERS
TO OPPORTUNITY
© Recruit 6,5OO new expert teachers in key subjects
© 3, OOO new primary school-based nurseries
© Free breakfast clubs in every primary school
© Amodern curriculum so young people are ready for work and life
© High-quality apprenticeships and specialist technical colleges
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 75MY STORY iE? gti
‘Ss ae A os_
& a)
-oa 4
Zahida,
Trust School Improvement Partner
“I went into education to make a difference for all children, especially those from council estates like the one I grew up on. I taught Spanish to Labour's\
Shadow Secretary of State for Education Bridget Phillipson. Having been a headteacher, it is my privilege to support Labour's plans for 6,5OO new teachers, free breakfast clubs in every primary school, and to give alll children the chance to take part in music, sport, and the arts. Bridgetq and her colleagues in government will continue to make that difference.”’
76 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24Whoever you are, wherever youl come from, Britain should be aBrea KI Ng the country where hard work meansperm IClIOUS you can get on in life. Under theI
Conservatives, this basic promiselin K between
- that if you work hard, you willbackg rou nd enjoy the rewards - has been broken. We are a country wherefe) nd SUCCESS who your parents are - and howwill be a defining much money they have - too::
often counts for more than yourMISSION for La bour effort and enterprise. Too many people see success as something that happens to others. This is ana appalling waste of talent as well as a huge injustice. So, breaking the pernicious link between background and success will be a defining mission for Labour.
First, we must recognise thatschool not ready to learn. Too many greater opportunity requireschildren are not even getting to greater security. Tackling economic school. Teachers are burnt out and insecurity - at work, at home, in our leaving in droves. Fewer people are communities and public servicesparticipating in apprenticeships
- is the golden thread that runsand training. Higher education is through all of Labour's missions. in crisis. Meanwhile, too many of
On that secure foundation, we can -- our young people leave school build an education system thatunprepared for the future.
prepares our children for life, work,;; and the future. Labour will transform our education system so that young people get
Our education system is struggling the opportunities they deserve.
to cope after years of chronicWe will expand our childcare mismanagement under theand early-years system, drive up
Conservatives. Childcare andstandards, modernise the school early education are increasinglycurriculum, reform assessment, and unaffordable and unavailable. create higher-quality training and
Too many children arrive at primary employment paths by empowering
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 77asISeed
7) os ho, oeoe
7 tT
Li‘-: oaat a, \ eaD>)
SAA ESI. ca » > “4 ¥
‘eo sy
5 $ e Lie -¢@I. ° - ':
aI epro) ee local communities to developgovernment will build on that the skills people need. We willlegacy of pursuing opportunity also put employers at the heartand social justice.
of our skills system.;;
Good work will be the foundation
Every child should believe thatof our approach to tackling poverty success belongs to them. Education and inequality. We will create more has so often been the spark thatgood jobs, reform employment can light a fire within, transforming - support, and make work pay so life chances. It is time to light thatthat many more people benefit fire for the whole country. from the dignity and purpose.. of work.
Family security
The last Labour government liftedLabour is committed to reviewing over half a million children andUniversal Credit so that it makes over a million pensioners out ofwork pay and tackles poverty.
poverty. That progress transformed We want to end mass dependence life chances and ensured securityon emergency food parcels, which in retirement. The next Labouris A moral scar on our society.
78 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24Child poverty has gone up by
7OO, OOO under the Conservatives, IMELDA with over four million children now growing up in a low-incomeSTAU NTON CBE family. Last year, a million childrenActor experienced destitution. This not only harms children’s lives now, it“welcome Labour's proposals damages their future prospects, set out by Keir Starmer and holds back our economicto broaden opportunity potential as a country. Labour willand make sure all young develop an ambitious strategypeople have access to the to reduce child poverty. We willarts. Opening up access work with the voluntary sector, to creativity in our schools faith organisations, trade unions, is critical, not just so that business, devolved and localour children have a better government, and communitieschance ata career in the to bring about change. arts, but because access is what will fuel growth in the
We will take initial steps tocreative industries - one of confront poverty by introducingthe most important sectors free breakfast clubs in everyfor the future of the economy primary school, protecting renters- creating good jobs in all from arbitrary eviction, slashingcorners of the country.” fuel poverty, banning exploitative zero hours contracts, and improving support to help people get into good work. increase productive investment; in the UK economy.
Our system of state, private, and workplace pensions provide theSecurity also means having basis for security in retirement. a secure roof over your head.
Labour will retain the triple lockThat is not the case for too many for the state pension. We willrenting their homes privately.
also adopt reforms to workplaceLabour will legislate where the pensions to deliver better outcomes Conservatives have failed, for UK savers and pensioners. Ouroverhauling the regulation of pensions review will consider what _ the private rented sector. We will further steps are needed to improve immediately abolish Section 2l security in retirement, as wellasto ‘no fault’ evictions, prevent private
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 79l_lFor far too many leaseholders,
M Ig n q Ud I Ity. the reality of home ownership early educationfalls woefully short of the dream
Ithey were promised. Labour will
O nd CnI Idca react where the Conservatives
IS Qa crucialhave failed and finally bring the. feudal leasehold system to an opportunityend. We will enact the package to tra nsformof Law Commission proposals on. leasehold enfranchisement, right life cha NCeS... to manage and commonhold.
La bour Will openWe will take further steps to ban
-new leasehold flats and ensure an add tionalcommonhold is the default tenure.
IWe will tackle unregulated and
3, O OO NUFSENesunaffordable ground rent charges.
LEWe will act to bring the injustice of
‘fleecehold’ private housing estates;; and unfair maintenance costs to renters being exploited andan end.
discriminated against, empower them to challenge unreasonableThe last Labour government rent increases, and take stepsmade huge strides in ending to decisively raise standards, homelessness. Under the including extending ‘Awaab's Law’Conservatives, that progress has to the private sector. been undone, with rough sleepers; i; an all-too-common sight in our
Labour will also take decisive action towns and cities, and a sharp to improve building safety, including tise in hidden homelessness.
through regulation, to ensure weBuilding on the lessons of our never again see a repeat of thepast, Labour will develop a new
Grenfell fire. We will review how tocross-government strategy, working better protect leaseholders fromwith Mayors and Councils across costs and take steps to acceleratethe country, to put Britain back on the pace of remediation across the track to ending homelessness.
country. We will put a renewed focus on ensuring those responsible forBest start in life the building safety crisis pay toHigh-quality early education and put it right. childcare is a crucial opportunity
8O Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24a *r.):
Pi>.
4: \ ~ I
‘a ih “ ve-; TM* a¥, LG\‘ aAy;:."-< to transform life chances. Too often with local government to support it is unavailable, or unaffordable. children in care, including through oo,. kinship, foster care, and adoption,
As an initial step, Labour will open..
we. as well as strengthening regulation an additional 3, OOO nurseries:;.. of the children’s social care sector.
through upgrading space in primary schools, to deliver theSadly, too often we see families extension of government fundedfalling through the cracks of public hours families are entitled to. services. Labour will improve data
Supporting children in the earlysharing across services, with a part of their life also means giving Single unique identifier, to better parents the flexibility they need tosupport children and families.
care for their children. Labour willRaising school standards review the parental leave system,..... o. Labour is determined to raise so it best supports working families,.
vs.. school standards for every child, within our first year in government.
and ensure they are prepared for
Every child should have a loving, the future. Most children attend secure home. Labour will workschools where the Conservatives
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24La bour Wi II fu ndTeaching is a hard-earned and hard-learned skill, Labour will free b red kfa stwork to further raise its status.
IWe will update the Early Career clubs IN eve ryFramework, maintaining its
DFIMOALry School, grounding in evidence, and. ensure any new teacher entering accessiblethe classroom has, or is working to Cd I child ren. towards, Qualified Teacher
Status. We will introduce a new
Ou l b rea kfa StTeacher Training Entitlement to clubs will support ensure teachers stay up to date on best practice with continuing
Da re nts th rou OQ hprofessional development.
the cost- ofSchool support staff play a vital
Nlialrole in children’s education and
IN Ng CHSISdevelopment. Labour will reinstate
EO Eothe School Support Staff Negotiating
Body, which will help address the acute recruitment and retention are failing to provide the supportcrisis in support roles and teaching that they need.
Labour will end the VAT exemptionRaising school standards starts with and business rates relief for private - early education. The last Labour schools to invest in our state schools. government's promotion
The factor that makes thof phonics put rocket boosters e factor that makes the Pe;; a, under the reading and writing ae merenee to oo s hing: ability of a generation of children.
COUCATON IS NIGH Quality Teac ING, We will do the same for numeracy, a oe are oreses ° qualifiedimproving the quality of maths eae ers ACTOSS © coun ry: teaching across nurseries and
Labour will recruit an additionalprimary schools
6,5OO new expert teachers. We will, get more teachers into shortageDeveloping early communication subjects, support areas that faceskills is another key foundation recruitment challenges, and tacklefor life, with serious knockon retention issues. The way bursaries consequences when development are allocated, and the structure ofis delayed. Labour will fund retention payments, will be reviewed. evidence-based early-language
82 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24interventions in primary schools, so essential digital, soeaking, and that every child can find their voice. _ creative skills. Yet today, too many;;;; are missing out. Labour will launch
Alongside high-quality teaching, an expert-led review of curriculum driving up standards in educationand assessment, working with requires outstanding leadership. school staff, parents and employers
Labour will create a new Excellence to change this.
in Leadership Programme, a mentoring framework thatOur reforms will build on the hard expands the capacity ofwork of teachers who have brought headteachers and leaders totheir subjects alive with knowledgeimprove their schools. Labourrich syllabuses, to deliver a will introduce new Regionalcurriculum which is rich and broad,
Improvement Teams, to enhanceinclusive, and innovative. To capture schoolto-school support, andthis breadth, our review will consider spread best practice. the right balance of assessment a,; methods whilst protecting the
Accountability is non-negotiable, important role of examinations.
which is why Labour supports school inspection. Under theToo often our education and care
Conservatives our inspectionsystems do not meet the needs of regime has been broken. A system - all children, including those with which declares nine inten schools Special Educational Needs and are good or outstanding fails toDisabilities (SEND). Labour will take provide sufficient informationa community-wide approach, on school performance. We willimproving inclusivity and expertise enhance the inspection regime by - in mainstream schools, as well as replacing a single headline gradeensuring special schools cater to with a new report card systemthose with the most complex needs.
telling parents clearly how schools - We will make sure admissions are performing. We will also bringdecisions account for the needs of
Multi-Academy Trusts into thecommunities and require all schools inspection system and introduce a to cooperate with their local new annual review of safeguarding, authority on school admissions, attendance, and off-rolling. SEND inclusion, and place planning.
Every child should have a broadToo many children’s life chances curriculum with an excellentare being scarred by rising poverty.
foundation in reading, writing andToo many arrive at school not ready maths, and support to developto learn, and too many are absent.
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 83Poor mental health is another barrier to learning. The struggle to access support Is paralysing children and young people through their formative years. Labour will provide access to specialist mental health professionals
In every school
Breakfast clubs improve behaviour, - This will complement our plan attendance, and learning. Labourfor Young Futures Hubs, which will will fund free breakfast clubs inmake sure every community has every primary school, accessiblean open-access hub for children to all children. Our breakfast clubsand young people with dropin will support parents through themental health support.
costof-living crisis. We will alsofwnat bring down the cost of school byRe orming urther.
limiting the number of brandedand higher education; items of uniform and PE kit thatAfter years of Conservative chaos schools can require. and policy churn, the skills system in England is confusing for young
Poor mental health is anotherpeople, adults, and employers.
barrier to learning. The struggleApprenticeship numbers have to access support is paralysingplummeted. Skills shortages are children and young peoplewidespread. Young people have through their formative years. been left without the opportunities
Labour will provide accessthey need. The result is an to specialist mental healtheconomy without the necessary professionals in every school, soskills, nor any plan for the skills every young person has access to - needs of the future. Labour will early support to address problems address this by bringing forward before they escalate. a comprehensive strategy
84 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24ey2P
- TMI anal‘Jwed: ee, I! fomeI uo: oo” Ne
‘Aihs q
\nseal
‘Be7"- a7 5_, \?‘ q
‘ ey Fad sie ce:: A:“¥ a nae:*) Ay +4A: f a. wh -a for postl6 education. Andempowering local leaders to we will guarantee training, anhave greater control of skills apprenticeship, or help to finddevelopment in their areas, work for all l8- to 2Iyear-olds. alongside a greater role in supporting people into work.
We will establish Skills England toSkills England will coordinate bring together business, trainingbetween local areas to ensure providers and unions with nationaleveryone can access alll the and local government to ensureopportunities available.
we have the highly trained workforce needed to deliverLabour will transform Further
Labour's Industrial Strategy. SkillsEducation colleges into specialist
England will formally work with theTechnical Excellence Colleges.
Migration Advisory Committee toThese colleges will work with make sure training in Englandbusinesses, trade unions, and accounts for the overall needs oflocal government to provide young the labour market. And we arepeople with better job opportunities committed to devolving adult skills I and the highly trained workforce funding to Combined Authorities, that local economies need.
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24Labour will also reformAccess to arts, music and sport the Conservatives’ brokenWith Labour, the arts and music
Apprenticeships Levy. The currentwill no longer be the preserve rigid rules ignore vital skillsof a privileged few. Culture is an and training needed to accessessential part of supporting children apprenticeships. Labour will create § and young people to develop a flexible Growth and Skills Levy, creativity and find their voice.
with Skills England consultingThere is huge potential for growth on eligible courses to ensurein the creative industries that qualifications offer value for money. benefit every corner of the UK.
Labour will continue to supportLabour will implement our the aspiration of every personcreative industries sector who meets the requirementsplan as part of our Industrial and wants to go to university. Strategy, creating good jobs and accelerating growth in film, music,
We recognise that UK highergaming, and other creative sectors.
education creates opportunity, We will work constructively with the is a world-leading sector in ourBBC and our other public service economy, and supports localbroadcasters so they continue communities. To better integrateto inform, educate and entertain further and higher education, people, and support the creative and ensure high-quality teaching, economy by commissioning
Labour's postl6 skills strategydistinctively British content.
will set out the role for different providers, and how students canLabour will support children to move between institutions, as wellstudy a creative or vocational as strengthening regulation. We will I subject until they are l6, and ensure act to improve access to universities accountability measures reflect and raise teaching standards. this. We will get more children active by protecting time for
The current higher educationphysical education, and supporting funding settlement does not workthe role grassroots clubs play for the taxpayer, universities, staff, in expanding access to sport.
or students. Labour will act to create a secure future for higher education Labour will improve access and the opportunities it createsto cultural assets by requiring across the UK. We will work withpublicly funded national museums universities to deliver for studentsand galleries to increase the loans and our economy. they make from their collections
86 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24<SSS ayo-. 4 as5Bp 2
> I
>,- iS52 S iil ___f] ey ee EE
- aini’, ieaa4,
3&Y to communities across thewhere we can, creating a legacy country. We will also launch ato inspire the next generation of new National Music Educationtalent while promoting exercise
Network - a one-stop shopand healthy living.
with information on courses and;;; classes for parents, teachers andLabour is committed to making children. Access to music, dramaBritain the best place in the; and sport has become difficultworld to be a football fan. We will and expensive because of ticketreform football governance to touting. Labour will put fans backprotect football clubs ACTOSS our at the heart of events by introducing communities and to give fans a new consumer protections ongreater say In the way they are ticket resales. run. We will introduce a Football.
Governance Bill, which will establish
From the Men's UEFA Europeanan independent regulator to ensure
Football Championship to the ICCfinancial sustainability of football
Women’s T2O World Cup to theclubs in England. We will never allow
Invictus Games, Labour willa closed league of select clubs to deliver international events withbe siphoned off from the English pride and seek new opportunitiesfootball pyramid.
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24pe
-; I
\-; a a\\J
Respect and opportunity for allLabour will introduce a landmark
Everyone in this country deservesRace Equality Act, to enshrine a government that matches theirin law the full right to equal pay ambition. Labour will ensure nofor Black, Asian, and other ethnic matter whatever your background, minority people, strengthen you can thrive, and therefore we will protections against dual enact the socio-economic duty indiscrimination and root out other the Equality Act 2OlO. racial inequalities. Labour will also reverse the Conservatives’ decision
Women's equality will be at theto downgrade the monitoring of heart of our MISSIONS. Our plan toantisemitic and Islamophobic hate.
Make Work Pay will transform the lives of working women, includingLabour is committed to by strengthening rights to equalchampioning the rights of pay and protections from maternity disabled people and to the and menopause discrimination and principle of working with them, so sexual harassment. And Labour will - that their views and voices will be take action to reduce the genderat the heart of all we do. We will pay gap, building on the legacy of - introduce the full right to equal
Barbara Castle’s Equal Pay Act. pay for disabled people. Building
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24on gender pay gap reporting, With La bou r, the we will introduce disability:
and ethnicity pay gap reportingO rts O nd MUSIC for large employers. We willWill No longer support disabled people to work by improving employmentbe the preserve support and access to reasonableIV/I adjustments. We will also tackleof eS) Pp VI leged the Access to Work backlog andfew. C U tu re is make sure people can try out a job' without fear of on immediate benefit an essentia I Pa rt reassessment if it does not work out. of SU pport NG
Delivering opportunities for allchildren and means that everyone should be treated with respect and dignity. YOu NG people
Labour will protect LGBT+ andto develop disabled people by making all.
existing strands of hate crimecreativity O nd an aggravated offence. find their voice
Socalled conversion therapy is abuse - there is no other word for it - so Labour will finally deliver a full trans-inclusive ban on conversion practices, while protecting the freedom for peopledoctor, enabling access to the to explore their sexual orientationhealthcare pathway.
and gender identity.;;;; Labour is proud of our Equality Act
We will also modemise, simplify, and the rights and protections it and reform the intrusive andaffords women; we will continue to outdated gender recognitionsupport the implementation of its law to a new process. We willsingle-sex exceptions.
remove indignities for trans people who deserve recognition andLabour will stop the chaos, acceptance; whilst retainingend the failure and division of the the need for a diagnosis oflast l4 years, and turn the page to gender dysphoria from a specialist I ensure everyone can thrive.
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 89wo(
-)aw
-_' 447 bs;‘
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24BUILD AN
NHS FIT FOR
THE FUTURE
© Cut NHS waiting times with
4O, OOO more appointments every week
© Double the number of cancer scanners
© Anew Dentistry Rescue Plan
© 8,5OO additional mental health staff
© Return of the family doctor
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 9laf; sSrme.
soy } ita.
C2 Tg spas \ aePy
92 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24The l945 Labour governmentla bour’s mission founded our National Health::
Service on principles that haveIS to bu I ld an N HS stood the test of time: fit for the future
The best health services shouldInvestment fe lone be available, free for all. MoneyF should no longer be the passportwon t be enou OQ h to the best treatment. People should t tkIth get the best that modern scienceO tackleec.
can offerproblems facing
For decades the NHS has servedthe N HS; It must us well, with those values enduring. l
These are the principles whichgO ha nd In ha nd will underpin the next Labourwith fu nda mental government's plan to reform the NHS. reform
But as we look at the NHS now, itis clearly broken - and the
Conservatives broke it, Whilst theThis is a situation Labour is familiar
Covidl8 pandemic placed the NHS with: we have saved the NHS before, under unprecedented stress, theand the next Labour Government reality is waiting lists were at record will do so again. With Labour, it will highs even before it struck. Ratheralways be publicly owned and than healthcare being ‘free for alll, publicly funded. But our ambition we now find ourselves with a de.
facto two-tier system - with workingoes beyond returning the NHS y3 to what it was. Labour's mission people regularly forced to scrapeis to build an NHS fit for the future.
together the means to go private. Investment alone won't be enough
Meanwhile, over the past I4 years, to tackle the problems facing the the ‘winter crisis’ cycle has become NHS; it must go hand in hand with part of the national calendar. Everyfundamental reform year, a new crisis is declared. Then,, every year, the Conservatives reach Wemust change the NHS so that for a sticking plaster patchup toit becomes not just a sickness get through the winter, without ever - service, but able to prevent ill addressing the root cause. heath in the first place. It must also
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 93~~ -
- ss ';_.
» &
AMBUL
ANCE.
reflect the change in the naturesaving potentially thousands of of disease, with a greater focuslives. And we will embed a greater on the management of chronic, focus on prevention throughout long-term conditions. And we willthe entire healthcare system and deliver a renewed drive to tackle the supporting services. As we knew in biggest killers; cutting the lives lost l945, much avoidable ill health can to cancer, cardiovascular diseasebe prevented.
and suicide, while ensuring people;; live well for longer. The factor that is markedly different from the past decades is our
Labour's reforms will shift ourunderstanding of mental health.
NHS away from a model gearedAcross society, mental health has towards late diagnosis andstepped out of the shadows, yet treatment, to a model whereit is difficult to argue the NHS has more services are delivered inkept up. Indeed, Britain is currently local communities. We will harness - suffering from a mental health the power of technologies like Alepidemic that is paralysing lives, to transform the speed andparticularly those of children accuracy of diagnostic services, and young people. This is a tragedy
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24- arguably nothing says more about the state of a nation than theDAME JULIE wellbeing of its children. So right at the core of our mission will be a boldMOORE new ambition to raise the healthiestFormer CEO of generation of children in our history.°°
And, as a crucial part of that, we willBirmingham NHS Trust reform the NHS to ensure we give“I've worked in the NHS for mental health the same attentionalong time and I remember and focus as physical health. how Labour, the party who
Get the NHS back on its feetcledted the NHS, transformed
We should all be able to trust thatWO 2O Feo elnlig the NHS will be there for us whenHee ean eco in ans oe we need it, whether it is a GPItis Wel deeb to see its appointment, an ambulance, orGSE line over wD EES E: years.
help at A&E. Labour's immediateIt will be difficult but I believe priority on health will be to get athat, under Keir Starmer, grip on the record waiting list. Labour's ELS, short eine
We will return to meeting NHSlong term, will once again performance standards. ThatKESETOULOLI ES eC ien means patients should expect toKe FEES Weel care sel LHD wait no longer than l8 weeks fromPeople of this Wehilehy, reducing referral for consultant-led treatmentwaiting HSS elie Se elite of non-urgent health conditions. Teiasecarlins 42) OLEH
This standard was achieved with thevou last Labour government and will be again under the next.;; shared waiting lists to allow patients
As a first step, in England weto be treated quicker. Recognising will deliver an extra two millionthe urgent need to bring down
NHS operations, scans, and; waiting lists, Labour will use spare appointments every year, that tscapacity in the independent sector
4O, OOO More appointments everyto ensure patients are diagnosed week. We will do this by incentivising Gng treated more quickly.
staff to carry out additional appointments out of hours. Getting the NHS back to working
Labour will pool resources acrossfor patients means ending the neighbouring hospitals to introduce workforce crisis across both health
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 95NHS staff, moving away from the
We should allConservatives’ failed approach.
be able to trust7. Modernising the NHS that the NHS WillA system reliant on pagers and fax machines is not fit for this decade be there for USlet alone the next. Too many cancer when We needdeaths could have been prevented.“iswith earlier diagnosis. The NHS has
It, whether It IS afewer diagnostic scanners per
G pp fe e) Ol Nntm (a) nt, person than other countries, with many ageing machines operating onam bu la NCE, for long after they should. State of or hel fe atthe art scanners with embedded
FAl are faster and more effective at
A&E. La bour Sfinding smaller tumours, saving ''''lives. Therefore, Labour will introduce
Im med late priority a new ‘Fit For the Future’ fund to
On hea Ith willdouble the number of CT and MRI
°scanners, allowing the NHS to catch be to get O OQ rl e)cancer and other conditions earlier, on the recordsaving lives.
waiting listIt is also clear that NHS estates are in a state of disrepair after eeyears of neglect. Labour is therefore and social care. When one incommitted to delivering the seven people in hospital do notNew Hospitals Programme.
need to be there, joint working is;; essential. Labour will ensure theThe even taking place publication of regular, independent in data and life sciences has workforce planning, across healththe potential to transform our and social care. We will delivernation’s healthcare. The Covidl9 the NHS long-term workforce planpandemic showed how a strong to train the staff we need to getmission-driven industrial strategy, patients seen on timeinvolving government partnering, with industry and academia, could
Too many patients have seenturn the tide on a pandemic. This their treatment affected by strikes. is the approach we will take in
Labour will reset relations withgovernment. As part of Labour's
96 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24}
4 oyIIY} life sciences plan, we will developparticipate through the NHS app.
an NHS innovation and adoptionThis will mean putting Britain at the strategy in England. This willinclude - forefront of transforming treatment a plan for procurement, giving afor dementia.
clearer route to get products into the NHS, coupled with reformedPower to patients incentive structures to driveAt the heart of every medical innovation and faster regulatorydecision must be patients and their approval for new technologyfamilies. Too many are not treated and medicines. with the respect they deserve or given the information they need to
Drawing on the strength of ouradequately access services and
National Health Service, Labournavigate the system.
will also maximise our potential to lead the world in clinical trials. Labour will therefore transform
This means making the processthe NHS app, putting patients more efficient and accessible, in control of their own health to by speeding up recruitment andbetter manage their medicine, giving more people a chance toappointments, and health needs.
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24This will include giving performance We will work to implement the information on local services, andexpert recommendations of the notifications of vaccinations andCass Review to ensure that young health checks. Patients willbe able people presenting to the NHS with to see the medical guidelines forgender dysphoria are receiving the treatment they should get, toappropriate and high-quality care.
hold health services to account and understand what their choices are. Healthcare closer to home
The National Health Service needs
Ensuring patient safetyto move to a Neighbourhood Health
Childbirth should not be something Service, with more care delivered in women fear or look back onlocal communities to spot problems with trauma. Labour will ensureearlier. To achieve this, we must over that trusts failing on maternitytime shift resources to primary care care are robustly supported intoand community services.
rapid improvement. We will train thousands more midwives as partGPs are the front door to the health of the NHS Workforce Plan and setService for most people. Excellent an explicit target to close the Blackprimary care Is the key to earlier and Asian maternal mortality gap. diagnosis, but too often rt is not possible to get an appointment,
Labour will digitise the Redso Labour will reform the system.
Book record of children’s health, We will train thousands more improving support for new families. I GPs, guarantee a faceto-face
We will also enable vaccinationsappointment for all those who for babies and children as part ofwant one and deliver a modern health visits. appointment booking system to; end the 8am scramble. We will
So much of the treatment inbring back the family doctor by the NHS IS dependent on theincentivising GPs to see the same effective administration ofpatient, so ongoing or complex services. Managers need supportconditions are dealt with effectively.
and accountability. Labour will implement professional standards - Labour will also take the pressure and regulate NHS managers, off GP surgeries, by improving ensuring those who commit serious access to services and treatment misconduct can never do so again. through new routes. We will create a
And we will establish a Royal College Community Pharmacist Prescribing of Clinical Leadership to champion - Service, granting more pharmacists the voice of clinicians. independent prescribing rights
98 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24I > aase).
iy, - ~~aI -.
£m > »-_--R, a aS\- 4 at;% i f-: < where clinically appropriate. Dentistry Rescue Plan
We will allow other professionals, Getting an NHS dentist is such as opticians, to make directincreasingly a lottery and the referrals to specialist services orconsequences are dire. The most tests, as well as expanding self-common reason children aged five referral routes where appropriate. to nine are admitted to hospital is to have rotting teeth removed. Labour
The principle of integratingwill tackle the immediate crisis with health and care services willa rescue plan to provide 7OO, OOO improve the treatment patientsmore urgent dental appointments receive. We know that more of this and recruit new dentists to areas care needs to happen outsidethat need them most. To rebuild hospitals. Therefore, we will trialdentistry for the long term, Labour
Neighbourhood Health Centres, will reform the dental contract, with by bringing together existinga shift to focusing on prevention services such as family doctors, and the retention of NHS dentists.
district nurses, care workers, We will also introduce a supervised physiotherapists, palliative care, tooth-brushing scheme for 3- to and mental health specialists5-year-olds, targeting the areas of under one roof. highest need.
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 99ryeI
_- es f~~
- -_-~« _- -_-,
- it se
Social care reformprinciple of ‘home first’ that supports
Labour is committed to ensuringpeople to live independently for as everyone lives an independent, long as possible. Our new standards prosperous life. Social care is vitalwill ensure high-quality care and to achieving this, but hundreds ofongoing sustainability, and ensure thousands of people suffer without providers behave responsibly.
the care they need for a dignifiedLabour will develop local partnership life. The sector needs deep reform: - working between the NHS and social there are inconsistent standards, care on hospital discharge.
chronic staff shortages, and people are not always treated with the care, We will enhance partnership dignity and respect they deserve. working across employers, workers, trade unions and government and
Labour will undertake a programme __ establish a Fair Pay Agreement of reform to create a National Care in adult social care. This sector
Service, underpinned by nationalcollective agreement will set fair standards, delivering consistencypay, terms and conditions, along of care across the country. Services - with training standards. Labour will will be locally delivered, with aconsult widely on the design of this
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24agreement, before beginning theLa bour Will process and learn from countries where they operate successfully. U nd © rta ke O
Labour is committed to ensuringProg rOMMe of families have the support theyreform to create need. We will guarantee the rights:
of those in residential care to beO National able to see their families. As partl of the efforts to move healthcareCa re Service, into local communities andunderpinned professionalise the workforce,.
we will task regulators withby national assessing the role social caresta nda rd S, workers can play in basic health..
treatment and monitoring. del IVerI NG
Alongside these changes, we willconsistency build consensus for the longerof care across term reform needed to create a sustainable National Care Service. the COU ntry
We will explore how we best manage and support an ageing population; how integration with.
the NHS can be secured; how toan additional 8,5OO new staff to best support working age disabledtreat children and adults through adults; and how to move toamore CU first term. As part of our mission preventative system. to reduce the lives lost to suicide, these new staff will be specially trained to support people at risk.
Improving mental healthLabour's new Young Futures hubs
The NHS has struggled to keepwill provide open access mental up with greater awareness ofhealth services for children and the challenges of mental health. young people in every community.
Waiting lists for those referredoo for support are too high, andMental health legislation is also shamefully so for young people. woefully out of date. The treatment of people with autism and learning
Labour will bring waiting times down difficulties is a disgrace. The and intervene earlier. We will recruit operation of the Mental Health Act
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 lOl, ’. PD¢, ~< ie.; a yEl-998 eT 4p)
> A Ae\ 2we oe I(p «: € eoJ
“a ‘4\5iPDe; Y ai z..)
4Ps ".
4.)7.
discriminates against Black peopleThat starts with smoking. Labour who are much more likely to bewill ensure the next generation can detained than others. Labour willnever legally buy cigarettes and modernise legislation to give patients ensure all hospitals integrate ‘optgreater choice, autonomy, enhanced out’ smoking cessation interventions rights and support, and ensureinto routine care. Labour will ban everyone is treated with dignityvapes from being branded and and respect throughout treatment. advertised to appeal to children.. to stop the next generation from
Action on public healthbecoming hooked on nicotine.
Prevention will always be better, and cheaper, than a cure. So, We face a childhood obesity crisis.
we must take preventative publicSo, Labour is committed to banning health measures to tackle theadvertising junk food to children biggest killers and support peoplealong with the sale of high-caffeine to live longer, healthier lives. energy drinks to under-l6s.
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24Children and young people faceRig ht at the significant harm online, with inappropriate content too easilyCOre of OUr available at their fingertips on amission will smartphone. We have seen an increase in extreme misogynisticbe O bold New content online driving a culture ofitil violence against women. Labourambition to rOlse will build on the Online Safety Act, the hea Ith lest bringing forward provisions as' quickly as possible, and exploregeneration further measures to keep everyoneof ch I Id ren safe online, particularly when using: hi t social media. We will also giveIN OUF NIS Ory coroners more powers to access information held by technology companies after a child’s death. a
Labour is committed to reducing gambling-related harm. Recognising the evolution of the gambling landscape since 2OO5, Labour will reform gambling regulation, strengthening protections. We will continue tobe neglected. Labour will prioritise work with the industry on how towomen’s health as we reform ensure responsible gambling. the NHS.
Reducing health inequalities. We are currently on the cusp of
The UK has stark health inequalities. eradicating new cases of HIV.
it cannot be right that lifeLabour will commission a new expectancy varies so widely ACTOSS 7 Gotion plan in England, in and within communities. AS partpursuit of ending HIV cases by 2O3O.
of our health mission, Labour will tackle the social determinants ofLabour will stop the chaos in health, halving the gap in healthyour health and care services, life expectancy between the richest turn the page, and reform them and poorest regions in England. in line with the principles of the
Never again will women’s healthNHS that Labour founded.
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 lO34
I ve
SS, Lee oP -,. _.
* _
< } 4 he3: pete
PT“ee? eee
I; als {ys\\ uh Sata“Sia
I Bp veal oe a, we __-- rr --__ ST
YP -
TT ---
-- Oe ee eee Sees ial peal &- eee fo _\ a He e tere By ee Bes
Maplin YE oo anata I eee AIL © (Te Sa ee Hee
See
POT ee~--- riaNS
Se-- aN NN eure 7] lll LAMM N peer III Preys eda ad AN
Titi suf [oe er ee ee ee
TTTT TT Le eee LITT See Mf) ji ae ‘ arn -at lO4 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24© Anew Ethics and
Integrity Commission
© Modernise the House of Commons
© Immediate reform of the House of Lords
© Areset between Westminster and Holyrood, Cardiff Bay, and Stormont
© Votes at l6Over the last l4 years, trust in politics claiming “we're all in it together” has been shattered. Partying inwhile decimating public services,
Downing Street whilst the wholeto the empty promises to “level country sacrificed their freedom. up”, gimmicks and gestures have
Handing lucrative Covid contractsshamefully replaced the hard graft to friends and donors. Failing toof governing.
expel MPs caught breaking the rules.
The behaviour of the Conservatives In contrast, Labour has been has understandably led to atransformed from a party of protest widespread belief that manyto one that always puts the interests politicians are in it for themselves. of the country first. Now we are
As a result, there is now a crisis ofdetermined to do the same with confidence in our political system's Our politics, returning government ability to deliver any change. to the service of working people..
This will require a reset in our public
This is not limited to Westminster -life; a cleanup that ensures the in Scotland, the Scottish Nationalhighest standards of integrity and
Party has also failed to uphold thehonesty. We will make sure MPs standards expected in public life. focus on serving their constituents.
The scandals may be different, We will deepen our democracy by but the SNP has also soughtreforming Parliament and devolving to protect its own and failed topower to communities. And rather address the behaviour of its MPsthan stoking division - as do both and MSPs, from sexual harassment the Conservatives and the SNP - scandals to accusations of financial we will ensure there is respect and mismanagement and defendingcollaboration across the different the inappropriate use of publicgovernments that make up the expenses. The people of ScotlandUnited Kingdom.
also deserve better from their;;. Setting the highest of standards representatives.: oo:
in public life is not just about
It is not just sleaze and scandal that better behaviour or decisionhave eroded trust. Just as corrosive making, though it will improve both.
has been the inability of politicians It is also central to restoring trust to keep promises made to the British lbetween the public and politics.
people. Over the last l4 years, theAfter l4 years of chaos, division vast chasm between Conservative and disrespect, the British people slogans and reality has shown aare understandably cynical about contempt for democracy. Fromappeals to come together in the lO6 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24Labour will restore confidence in gove'n ment and ensure ministers are held to the highest standards.
We will establish a new independent
Ethics and Integrity Commission, with its own independent Chair, to ensure probity IN government national interest. But the challenges Wewill give the Independent Adviser we face demand nothing lesson Ministerial Interests the powers to
- itis the lifeblood of nationalstart investigations into misconduct renewal. This plan recognisesand ensure they have access to the that politics must make the firstevidence they need.
move in repairing that bond. Most MPs work hard to serve
Restoring public servicetheir constituents but can be in Westminsterhamstrung by arcane procedures
Labour will restore confidence inand outdated working practices.
government and ensure ministers Labour will establish a new are held to the highest standards. I Modernisation Committee tasked
We will establish a new independent With reforming House of Commons
Ethics and Integrity Commission, procedures, driving up standards, with its own independent Chair, and improving working practices.
to ensure probity in government. The absence of rules on second jobs also means some constituents
Labour will review and update post- end up with MPs who spend more government employment rules to _ time on their second job, or lobbying end flagrant abuses seen underfor outside interests, than on the Conservatives. This includesrepresenting them. Therefore, as an enforcing restrictions on ministersinitial step, Labour will support an lobbying for the companies theyimmediate ban on MPs from taking used to regulate, with meaningfulup paid advisory or consultancy sanctions for breaching the rules. roles. We will task the Modernisation
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 lO7Committee to take forward urgentappointments process to ensure work on the restrictions that needthe quality of new appointments to be put in place to prevent MPsand will seek to improve the from taking up roles that stop them national and regional balance serving their constituents and theof the second chamber.
country..:.:
Whilst this action to modernise
Constitutional reformthe House of Lords will be an
Although Labour recognises theimprovement, Labour is committed good work of many peers whoto replacing the House of Lords with scrutinise the government andan alternative second chamber improve the quality of legislationthat is more representative of the passed in Parliament, reform is long regions and nations. Labour will over-due and essential. Too manyconsult on proposals, seeking the peers do not play a proper role ininput of the British public on how our democracy. Hereditary peerspolitics can best serve them.
remain indefensible. And because.
appointments are for life, theUpholding democracy second chamber of ParliamentLabour is committed to has become too big. strengthening our democracy and upholding the integrity of
The next Labour government willelections. Rather than encouraging therefore bring about an immediate _ full participation in our democracy, modernisation, by introducingthe Conservatives have brought legislation to remove the right ofin partisan changes that make it hereditary peers to sit and vote inharder to vote, whilst doing nothing the House of Lords. Labour will alsoto strengthen protections against introduce a mandatory retirement foreign interference.
age. At the end of the Parliament inOo, which a member reaches 8O yearsTo encourage participation IN Our of age, they will be required to retire democracy, Labour will improve from the House of Lords. voter registration and address the inconsistencies in voter ID rules that
Labour will ensure all peers meetprevent legitimate voters the high standards the public expect from voting. For example, in of them, and we will introduce anew the case of HM Armed Forces participation requirement as wellVeteran Cards. We will increase as strengthening the circumstances the engagement of young people in which disgraced members canin our vibrant democracy, by be removed. We will reform thegiving l6- and l7year-olds the lO8 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24rbat ee\Ja Pee. a ate ET LETBS ARBo Few’ Lai $
4 A za2AK TOR; I hy.
“.) ZNO) S» ae”A 4--ne: a -:“ -.\
%Pay O right to vote in all elections. Andso elected representatives can we will protect democracy byhold power to account.
strengthening the rules around; donations to political parties. Labour will ensure the structures and institutions of
Greater collaboration andintergovernmental working respect across the countryimprove relationships and
As part of Labour's plans to clean up collaboration on policy. Labour politics and return it to the servicewill strengthen the Sewel of working people, we will reset the I Convention by setting out a new
UK government's relationship withmemorandum of understanding devolved governments in Scotland, - outlining how the nations will work
Wales, and Northern Ireland. together for the common good.
The Conservatives weakenedLabour will renew opportunities our country by disrespectingfor the Prime Minister and Heads the legitimate role of devolvedof Devolved Government to governments and parliaments. collaborate with each other.
We will ensure members ofAs recommended in the Report of devolved legislatures have thethe Commission on the UK's future, same free speech protectionswe will establish a new Council of enjoyed by MPs at Westminster, the Nations and Regions. This will
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 lO9' ae I
\ XN: j y bring together the Prime Minister, Scottish devolution the First Ministers of Scotland andand the Scotland Office
Wales, the First and deputy FirstThe people of Scotland deserve
Minister of Northern Ireland, and the governments that are focused
Mayors of Combined Authorities. on delivering for them. Labour. does not support independence
The next Labour government willPPP.. or another referendum, but we also ensure that UKwide bodies are know that after l4 vears of the more representative of our nations Conservatives ne eople of and regions. UK trade negotiatorsScotlandd h P in b will work with devolved governments co an nee CHANGE. LABOUT; will take a different approach to promote our fantastic businesses. Scotland: il protect and and services internationally. Labour IN SCO _, i. wl ote an will restore decision-making overrespect evolution and reset the allocation of structural fundsrelations between governments.
to the representatives of Scotland, Labour will strengthen Scottish
Wales, and Northern Ireland. Thedemocracy and devolution planned investments in publicchampioning Scotland at home services outlined in this manifestoand abroad. We will ensure the by a UK government will result indevolution settlement for Scotland additional funding for Scotland, enables collaboration on Labour's
Wales, and Northern Ireland. national missions for government.
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24We will maintain the arrangementsla bour Wi II in the new Scottish fiscal framework... ensure the
A UK Labour government will have a more collaborative approachstru ctu res a nd to the Scottish Government oninstitutions of their international engagement.:
We recognise that within devolvedInte ge) overnmMe nta I competencies, the Scottishworki Ng iM fe) rove
Government has an important..
role to play. In respect to whollyrelations h I DS devolved issues, Labour will support' the Scottish Government to partner e nd col [e) boration with international bodies whereOn policy relevant and appropriate, for example to collaborate on global health initiatives. Thea
UK Government will retain full responsibility over foreign policy.;;-Welsh devolution
The Scotland Office will maximiseand the Wales Office
Scotland's influence, and withWales has been failed by a
Labour it will once again becomechaotic and divisive Conservative an advocate for Scotland, both atGovernment that does not home and abroad. The scotlandunderstand the ambitions of the
Office will ensure the voice ofWelsh people and refuses to work
Scotland is properly heard on issues with the Welsh Government to under the competence of the UKachieve them. Labour will serve
Government. scotland has anWales with a plan that matches enviable international reputation. those ambitions.
Its culture, products and services are internationally renowned - from We will strengthen the relationship whisky and salmon to computerbetween the governments in game development, bioscienceWestminster and Cardiff Bay.
and financial services. Labour willThe two governments will work champion ‘Brand Scotland’ across -_ collaboratively to deliver Labour's the world through the Scotlandnational missions. Labour recognises
Office, and our diplomatic andthat the Welsh Fiscal Framework trade networks. is out of date. We are committed
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 Ill& ima:/
\, > om. ~ ©
7“Ay faber ¥ iMeo:(a8 NN) \5
\. &I \ iy, \ { "J/
}NeTE ns
‘4MA}K. i} a t?”ian aesee.
to working in partnership with theemployment support funding to
Welsh Government to ensure thethe Welsh Government.
framework delivers value for money; with two Labour governmentsWelsh culture, products and services committed to fiscal responsibility. are renowned around the world - from the thriving tourism sector and
Labour recognises the value ofhighest-quality steel to Welsh Lamb integrated public services, whichand semi-conductors. Labour will are more efficient and createharness the UK's diplomatic and better outcomes. As part of thetrade networks, working with the strategic review into probation, Welsh Government to champion we will explore the devolution ofWales across the world.
services to enable them to be more locally responsive. We will workWith Labour, the Wales Office will with the Welsh Labour Governmentonce again become an advocate to consider devolution of youthfor Wales at home and abroad justice. In line with our commitment - and facilitate closer collaboration to devolve employment supportbetween our governments. The in England, Labour will devolveWales Office will ensure on issues
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24under the competence of the UKLabour government. As a guarantor
Government the voice of Wales isof the Good Friday Agreement, a properly heard. Labour government will uphold both the letter and the spirit of the
Northern Ireland-Agreement, along with the principle
Northern Ireland needs stabllityof consent on which it rests. We will and long-term certainty after thework with the Irish Government to challenges of recent years. Labourstrengthen the relationship between will work with the Executive andour two countries.
Assembly to improve public services and generate economic growth, The Legacy Act denies justice to the and with all political parties andfamilies and victims of the Troubles.
communities to ensure the stability Labour will repeal and replace it, of devolved government. by returning to the principles of;; the Stormont House Agreement,
Lalbour is committed toand seeking support from all implementing the Windsorcommunities in Northern Ireland.
Framework in good faith and protecting the UK internal market. Labour will end the chaos of sleaze
Northern Ireland's economy hasand division, turn the page, and enormous strengths - with a highly reset politics to put it back in the skilled workforce, strong services, service of working people.
manufacturing and life sciences sectors, and great opportunities for inward investment. A Labour government will champion Northern
Ireland around the world and work with the Executive to encourage more businesses to invest in
Northern Ireland's future.
Labour is committed to taking forward discussions with the
Executive about a fiscal framework for Northern Ireland.
The Good Friday Agreement, and the peace and prosperity it has brought to Northern Ireland, is one of the proudest achievements of the last
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 ll34 ee i -: a. I, q.
eS~
+<s ~S
£oeao
Se SSaa
7ia eee ee _7Bas uc iu I5
Xs)! et+- ¥r _# s “ ef tort. vr. ees roe:~ \ 4 +; wemiur‘ } YY
\YAW ae;4 l~~X~~
(oe I: z
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24© An unshakeable commitment to
NATO and our nuclear deterrent
© Standing up for our armed forces and veterans
© New trade agreements
© Britain leading a
Clean Power Alliance
© Modernise international development
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 ll5j,, jp g2 yt) a " fy.4
Z->”
LUN~ 4,«a i~ ©_- hl
[ine eS.'/; ri 7;-
With Labour, Britain will once againThis darkening global landscape be strong on the world stage, demands a strong and confident in the pursuit of ourconnected Britain.
national interest, and progressive;; a. Instead, chaotic Conservative but realistic about the challenges;.
we face. We will reconnect withforeign policy has weakened our;,. alliances, squandered our climate allies and forge new partnerships...
Sel;4; leadership - a huge diplomatic to deliver security and prosperityopportunity - and undermined at home and abroad. our reputation as upholders of
Over the last l4 years, the worldinternational law. At home, has grown more volatile andConservative attacks on our insecure. War has returned toglobally respected institutions -
Europe for the first time in auniversities, courts and the BBC...- have undermined our soft generation, there is devastatingae iolence in the Middle Eastpower, traditionally a source of viooe;;‘great strength, and diminished rapid technological change.;-; our influence.
and the climate crisis are fuelling geopolitical tensions, and malignThis failure on the international actors are seeking to divide us. stage has cost the British people.
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24scettengneegrtigea - WIth Labour, food prices as a result. Britain will ONCE
Labour will turn the page andagain be strong reverse this, reinvigorating alliances Of) the world and forging new partnerships.:.
Our commitment to NATO ws thestage, confident IN cornerstone of European andthe Ou rsu it of our global security is unshakeable.::
We will be confident in our statusnational Inte rest.
outside of the EU, but a leadingl nation in Europe once again, OU F COM! tment with an improved and ambitiousto NATO Qs the relationship with our European partners. We will once again becornerstone of a good partner for internationalEu roped Na nd develooment, and a defender of° the international rule of law. And we OQ lobal Secu rity will return to the forefront of climate jg YUNMShakeable action by creating the green jobs of the future at home and drivinges forward the energy transition on;;; the global stage. with the United States on the basis of our shared values and common
Britain will be a reliable partner, interests including on economic coa dependable ally, and a goodoperation, defence and intelligence.
neighbour. An optimistic country; oo, at the start of an era of renewal. With Labour, Britain will stay outside of the EU. But to seize
Rebuilding relationshipsthe opportunities ahead, we must
Britain is always stronger whenmake Brexit work. We will reset the we work with others. The Unitedrelationship and seek to deepen
States is an indispensable ally. ties with our European friends,
Our special relationship is crucialneighbours and allies. That does for security and prosperity, andnot mean reopening the divisions transcends whatever politicalof the past. There will be no return parties and individuals are into the single market, the customs office. We will continue to workunion, or freedom of movement.
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 lI7)7 raOuO’. a fedf be > Fs? ” i fee- - a Bea. Irs.
‘ 4Pe.._“ss
- eeALE,
Instead, Labour will work to improve France and Germany, through the UK’s trade and investmentincreased defence and security relationship with the EU, by tearingco-operation. We will seek new down unnecessary barriers tobilateral agreements and closer trade. We will seek to negotiateworking with Joint Expeditionary a veterinary agreement to prevent -_ Force partners. This will strengthen unnecessary border checks andNATO and keep Britain safe.
help tackle the cost of food; help; oo; our touring artists; and secure aMultilateral institutions remain mutual recognition agreementindispensable, but they are for professional qualificationsstruggling under the strain of new to help open up markets for UKglobal challenges. Labour will work service exporters. with allies to build, strengthen and reform these institutions. We will use
Labour will seek an ambitious new __ the UK’s unique position in NATO, the
UKEU security pact to strengthenUN, G7, G2O and the Commonwealth cooperation on the threats weto address the threats we face, face. We will rebuild relationshipsand to uphold human rights and with key European allies, includinginternational law. Labour values
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24international law because ofAt the heart the security it brings. Britain will.
unequivocally remain a memberof OUr SECU rity of the European Convention onare the men
Human Rights.
}and women
Defending the UK’s security
Labour's first duty in governmentwho serve d nd will be to keep our country safe. lin li
We will launch a Strategic Defencerisk their lives for
Review to assess the threats weth IS COU ntry. We face and the capabilities needed.
to address thorn. At the heartWI I strengthen of our security are the men andSU pport for our women who serve and risk their lives for this country. We willArmed FO rCes strengthen support for our Armed Communities
Forces communities by putting the Armed Forces CovenanteS fully into law and establishing an independent Armed Forcesincluding steel, across the whole of
Commissioner to improve servicethe UK. We will establish life. Labour will ensure veteranslong-term partnerships between have access to the mental health, I business and government, promote employment, and housing support - innovation, and improve resilience.
and in other areas they need. We will prioritise UK businesses for
We will also scrap visa feesdefence investment and will reform for nonUK veterans who haveprocurement to reduce waste.
served for four or more years, Labour will support industry to and their dependents. benefit from export opportunities, in line with a robust arms export
Strengthening Britain’s securityregime committed to upholding requires a long-term partnershipinternational law.
with our domestic defence industry.
Labour will bring forward a defence Strengthening our defences industrial strategy aligning ouralso requires stronger leadership, security and economic priorities. clearer accountability, faster
We will ensure a strong defencedelivery, less waste, and better value sector and resilient supply chains, for money. Labour will establish a
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 ll9llaundering, including in Britain, with Lalbou, Crown Dependencies, and in British the UK SmI I Ita ry, Overseas Territories.
fina ncial, Labour is fully committed to llAUKUS, the trilateral security d I plomatic O ndpartnership with Australia and
Ool itical SU pportthe United States. We will ensure.. it delivers its full economic as well for U kro INE WI Ias security potential, increasing remain steadfa St -_jobs and investment in communities across the UK.
After l4 years of damaging fully functioning military strategicConservative Inconsistency over headquarters and a nationalChina, Labour will bring a longarmaments director to create aterm and strategic approach to strong defence centre capablemanaging our relations. We will of leading Britain in meeting theco-operate where we can, compete increasing threats we face. where we need to, and challenge where we must. We will improve
With Labour, the Uk’s military, the UK’s capability to understand financial, diplomatic and politicaland respond to the challenges and support for Ukraine will remainopportunities China poses through steadfast. Labour will support efforts an audit of our bilateral relationship.
to hold Putin’s Russia to accountWe will always act in our interests for its illegal war, backing calls forand defend our sovereignty and our a Special Tribunal for the Crime ofdemocratic values. We will stand
Aggression. We will work with ourwith and support members of the allies to enable the seizure andHong Kong community who have repurposing of frozen Russian state -_ relocated to the UK.
assets to support Ukraine. And we;; will play a leading role in providingDefending our security also
Ukraine with a clear path tomeans protecting the British
NATO membership. Overseas Territories and Crown
Dependencies, including the
Labour will also work with our allies Falklands and Gibraltar. Labour and international financial centres __ will always defend their sovereignty to tackle corruption and moneyand right to self-determination.
l2O Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24ey--- Ipf. yy age dlNyat hyah4.(it.% r
I Oy> te wd 2) ‘< a‘ox vts‘I,~ My
*- a); I if!
l!3 xaA
Championing UK prosperityinsubstantial agreements which
Labour's first mission in government do not bring meaningful benefits will be to grow our economy. Thisto the UK, Labour will seek targeted will be at the heart of everythingtrade agreements aligned we do, including our foreign policy. - with our industrial strategy and
We will use our diplomatic network economic strengths, to bring to attract foreign direct investment prosperity to communities across into the UK, expand marketsEngland, Scotland, Wales, and for British exporters, and shapeNorthern Ireland.
emerging regulatory frameworks.;;
We will publish a trade strategy
Britain is a proud trading nation and and use every lever available to get flourishing international business is I UK business the access it needs a vital part of our plan forto international markets. This will growth. Openness to trade allowspromote the highest standards our firms to grow and deliverswhen it comes to food production.
greater choice and value forAs well as striking new free trade consumers. Rather than prioritising I agreements, Labour will seek
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24ILabour will build and strengthen
Labour will createvo strengt modern partnerships with allies and
Qa new Clea Nregional powers. We will seek a new
Istrategic partnership with India,
Power Al I ld NCE, including a free trade agreement, bri NG I NO tog etheras well as deepening cooperation oyein areas like security, education,
OQ Coda I ition oftechnology and climate change.
countries at theWe will deepen our cooperation. with partners across the Gulf on
Cutt NG edge ofregional security, energy and trade
IIand investment.
climate action
Recognising the growing political and economic importance of
African countries, we will deliver a new approach to the continent to foster opportunities for mutual to negotiate standalone sectorlong-term benefit.
deals, such as digital, or mutual recognition agreements, to promote Climate leadership our services exports. We cannot address the urgency of the climate and nature crisis
We will lead internationalwithout coordinated global discussions to modernise tradeaction. A failure to act will cause rules and agreements sO theyenvironmental devastation, fuelling work for Britain, promotingdisplacement, conflict and famine.
deeper trade and cooperationBy being climate leaders at home, including through the Worldincluding meeting our agreed
Trade Organisation and thetargets, Labour will restore the
Comprehensive and Progressivestrong global leadership needed
Agreement for Trans-Pacificto tackle the climate crisis.
Partnership. Labour supports implementation of the OECDInternational allies and competitors global minimum rate of corporatehave already recognised the taxation and backs internationalopportunities and are racing efforts to make sure multinationalahead, investing in new technology tech companies pay their fairand creating the jobs of the future.
share of tax. Under the Conservatives, Britain l22 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24¢Ax
I. -- has squandered our leadership, Strengthening diplomacy wasting the opportunity of ourLabour will strengthen Britain’s
COP26 presidency to make historic influence abroad, defending our progress. Labour will move fasternational interests, promoting by working together with ourprogressive values, and protecting international partners, especiallyUK nationals.
those at the forefront of the climate crisis, including Pakistan andOur diplomatic leadership is
Bangladesh, and the COP3Obolstered by the soft power hosts, Brazilof our world-leading cultural institutions. Rather than running
Labour will create a new Cleanthese institutions down, we will
Power Alliance, bringing togethera - work across government to bring coalition of countries at the cutting leading creative and cultural edge of climate action. This will help institutions together to increase to deliver lower energy bills whilethe UK’s international clout. And we accelerating the energy transitionwill work with our proud diaspora and protecting and enhancingcommunities to enhance our clean energy supply chains. cultural links across the world.
Labour Party Manifesto 2O24\a WY
\\ji, Wy DY \)\
--- ee <a
Mm UkKaidI A, mt.:- *tive in_ ~
Long-term peace and securityLabour will also strengthen support in the Middle East will be anfor British nationals abroad. We will immediate focus. Labourintroduce a new right to consular will continue to push for anassistance in cases of human immediate ceasefire, the releaserights violations.
of all hostages, the upholdingeo..
of international law, and a rapidModemising interational increase of aid into Gaza. Palestinian wa opmen lab:
statehood is the inalienable right Previous apour governmen S;... Britain gained world-leading of the Palestinian people. It is not inor.... expertise in international the gift of any neighbour and is also;;. development, with the aim of essential to the long-term security.. making the world a safer, more of Israel. We are committed to.. prosperous place. Under the recognising a Palestinian state...
aeConservatives, this capacity has as a contribution to a renewed.: been degraded, and as a result peace process which results in awe..: Britain has lost influence.
two-state solution with a safe and secure Israel alongside a viableLabour will turn the page to rebuild and sovereign Palestinian state. Britain’s reputation on international l24 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24development with a new approach _ fiscal circumstances allow.
based on genuine respect andWe will deliver value for money partnership with the global Southfor the British taxpayer by working to support our common interests. closely with the Independent ooCommission for Aid Impact to
To counter the growing influenceapply the highest standards of malign actors and boost efforts 4, our aid spend - bringing in to combat threats like climaterobust measures of development change, the Uk’s development work effectiveness, transparency, must be closely aligned with ourand scrutiny.
foreign policy aims, coordinated to tackle global poverty, instability, _ Labour will end the chaotic and the climate and nature crisis. approach to foreign affairs,
Our mission statement will be ‘toturn the page and reconnect create a world free from poverty on _- with our allies, to once again a liveable planet’ as a signalof our stand strong on the world stage.
commitment to greater multilateral action, and our intention to lead on this agenda.
Regaining Britain’s global leadership on development is a key part of our plan to reconnect with our allies and partners. Labour will strengthen international development work within the Foreign, Commonwealth
& Development Office. We will renew expertise and focus, especially in priority areas such as supporting economic transformation, tackling unsustainable debt, empowering women and girls, supporting conflict prevention, and unlocking climat e finance.
Labour is committed to restoring development spending at the level of O.7 per cent of gross national income as soon as
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 l25LABOUR'S
Our fiscal rules are non-negotiable We have not allocated and will apply to every decisionall additional revenue to taken by a Labour government. potential spending. This is
This means that the current budget a prudent approach in line must move into balance, so thatwith our commitment to dayto-day costs are met byeconomic stability.
revenues and debt must be falling_’’ as a share of the economy by thePolicies not see EME will be fifth year of the forecast. funded from existing budgets or do not have a cost.
Costs for Labour's additional public services spending are set out below. We have used the last year of the most recent Office for
Budget Responsibility forecast
(2O2829) which represents the highest annual cost of the policies.
However, we will begin to put these policies in place from day one of a Labour government, moving as quickly as possible in a way that also ensures value for money for the taxpayer.
l26 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24Public Services' REVENUE
(2O2828)£MPOLICIES FUNDED (2O2829)£M
4O, OOO more operations, scans and appointments every weekl, OlO
Revenue from closing furtherDouble the number of NHS CT and MRI95O non-dom taxscanners loopholes end5,23O Dentistry package including 7OO, OOO urgent
Investment Inappointments every yearl25 reducing tax avoidance? Free breakfast clubs in every primary school3l5
Investment in HMRC to reduce tax avoidance855
6,5OO new expert teachers45O
Increased teacher and headteacher training27O
Delivering work experience and careers advice for all young people85
Revenue fromEarly language development in primary applying VAT andl5lO schools8 business rates to" private schoolsOfsted reform45
Over 3, OOO new nurseries35
Mental health support for every schooll75
Young Futures Hubs95
Recruit 8,5OO new mental health staff4lO
Revenue fromLegal aid for victims of disasters closing carried565 oF State-related deaths?3O interest tax..
loophWaive visa costs for nonUK veterans who phole: a have served four years or more in the BritishlO forces*
Revenue from increasing stamp duty on purchases...
of residential4O Appoint 3OO new planning officers2O property by nonUK residents by l%
Barnett consequentials®65O
Total7,35O Total including Barnett consequentials4,835 l May not sum due to rounding.
2 Revenue from tax avoidance driven by additional £855m per year investment in HMRC. Does not include £6OOm revenue from removing non-dom discount loophole in 2O2526.
3 Costs are England and Wales.
4 Costs are UK wide.
5 Scotland (£32Om), Wales (£l95m), Northern Ireland (£l35m).
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 l27Green Prosperity Plan®
The Green Prosperity Plan will be funded in part by a time-limited windfall tax on the oil and gas giants making record profits, with the rest of the funding coming from responsible borrowing to invest within
Labour's fiscal rules - catalytic investment that will leverage higher private investment and boost economic growth.
For transparency, we have given an annual average across the parliament given the exact profile of projects will be driven by partnership with business.
feu£bnPolicies funded (annual average)£bn annual average)
Great British Energyl.7
National Wealth Fundl5
Windfall tax on oilPn7 and gas giantsl.2 British Jobs BonusO.3
Warm Homes Plan’l]
Barnett consequentialsO.2
Totall.2.. Total including Barnett consequentials47
Borrowing to invest
“ei3.5 within fiscal rules
6 May not sum due to rounding.
7 Elements of the British Jobs Bonus (up to £5OOm per year from 2O2627) and Warm Homes Plan will be devolved.
l28 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24Changes within departmental spending plans®
We have identified waste and other efficiencies which will be used to fund further public service priorities.
For transparency, we have used an annual figure that reflects the highest annual costs of these policies given the differing profiles of each spending priority.
FundinAmount
Fningre-allocated,
Policywithin existingannualised departmental plans‘
Prioritising frontline public service deliveryHalving consultancy: a745 and public sector capabilityspend l3, OOO additional neighbourhood policeF.
and community PCSOs; and specialistPolice Efficiency.: Fand Collaboration4OO domestic abuse advisers in 999 controlProgramme rooms at peak timesg
New measures to clear the asylum backlog: for sylurn hotelsl55
Caseworkers, Returns and Enforcment Unitaccommodation
Border Security Comand to tackle criminalScrap the Rwanda75 gangs behind small boat crossingsscheme
Invest in roads maintenance to fillDeferring the. or65 in up to l million potholes every yearA27 bypass
Put youth workers in A&E units and custody centres, and youth mentorsfrees lconeoe for2O in pupil referral units
Appoint legal advocates to provide free legal.
advice and support to rape survivors acrosseet erie i ne5
England and Wales
Totall,46O
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 l29’N i OO,
--S wc”,
Ki]
Manifesto 2O24At this election we can change Britain.
We can stop the chaos, turn the page, and start to rebuild our country.
A country restored to the service of working people; united in the common determination to build and share wealth. And with a renewed confidence that the future will be better for our children.
This manifesto contains our plan to begin that work.
& To succeed we will need every individual and community to play their part. We must come together, after l4 years of chaos and division.
That is what Britain needs - and we hope you will join us in this national endeavour.
Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24 l3ll32 Change Labour Party Manifesto 2O24Accessible versions of the manifesto are available at:
labour. org. uk/accessiblemanifesto or scan the QR code below
Obes CI mm On
Op:> Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change ange Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Change Chi's first
Labour's Tirs for ste e S change l. Deliver economic stabilit
2. Cut NHS waiting times
3. Launch a new Border Security Command
4. Set up Great British Enerc
5. Crack down on antisocial behaviour
6. Recruit 6,5OO new teachers
IKy
Keir StarmerLeader of the Labour Party
2338_24 Reproduced from electronic media. Promoted by David Evans on behalf of the Labour Party, both at 2O Rushworth Street, London, SE] OSS.