Why the Government believes that voting to remain in the
European Union is the best decision for the UK.
The EU referendum, Thursday, 23rd June 2Ol6.
An important decision for the UK
On Thursday, 23rd June there will be a referendum. It’s your opportunity to decide if the
UK remains in the European
Union (EU).
It’s a big decision. One that will affect you, your family and your children for decades to come.
The UK has secured a special status in a reformed EU:
we will not join the euro we will keep our own border controls the UK will not be part of further European political integration there will be tough new restrictions on access to our welfare system for new EU migrants we have a commitment to reduce EU red tape
The Government believes the UK should remain in the EU.
This leaflet sets out the facts, and explains why the
Government believes a vote to remain in the EU is in the best interests of the people of the UK. It shows some of the choices the UK would face if there were a vote to leave.
If you would like further information, please visit the Government’s EU referendum website at
This is your chance to decide your own future and the future of the
United Kingdom.
It is important that you vote
A stronger economy
The EU is by far the UK’s biggest trading partner.
EU countries buy 44% of everything we sell abroad, from cars to insurance. Remaining inside the EU guarantees our full access to its Single Market.
By contrast, leaving creates uncertainty and risk.
The EU’s Single Market has over 5OO million customers and an economy over five times bigger than the UK’s.
The Single Market makes it easier and cheaper for UK companies to sell their products outside the UK, creating jobs as a result.
Being inside the EU also makes it more attractive for companies to invest in the UK, meaning more jobs.
Over the last decade, foreign companies have invested
£54O billion in the UK, equivalent to £l48 million every day.
UK industry and the EU
Industry
Jobs
Share of exports going to EU
Aerospace llO, OOO
47%
Chemicals and pharmaceuticals l36, OOO
54%
Financial services l, O69, OOO
4l%
Food manufacturing
373, OOO
53%
IT and telecoms l,364, OOO
46%
Transport l, O65, OOO
44%
Over 3 million UK jobs are linked to exports to the EU
Improving our lives
Cost of living
If the UK voted to leave the
EU, the resulting economic shock would put pressure on the value of the pound, which would risk higher prices of some household goods and damage living standards.
Losing our full access to the
EU’s Single Market would make exporting to Europe harder and increase costs.
Travel abroad
Millions of UK citizens travel to Europe each year. The EU has made this easier and cheaper.
EU reforms in the l99Os have resulted in a drop in fares of over 4O% for lower cost flights.
From next year, mobile phone roaming charges will be abolished across the EU, saving UK customers up to
38p per minute on calls.
EU membership also gives
UK citizens travelling in other
European countries the right to access free or cheaper public healthcare.
Some argue little would change if we left the EU. But there are no guarantees UK customers would keep these benefits if we left.
If the UK voted to leave the EU, the resulting economic shock would risk higher prices of some household goods
What happens if we leave?
Voting to leave the EU would create years of uncertainty and potential economic disruption.
This would reduce investment and cost jobs.
The Government judges it could result in lO years or more of uncertainty as the UK unpicks our relationship with the EU and renegotiates new arrangements with the EU and over 5O other countries around the world.
Some argue that we could strike a good deal quickly with the EU because they want to keep access to our market.
But the Government’s judgement is that it would be much harder than that - less than 8% of EU exports come to the UK while 44% of UK exports go to the EU.
No other country has managed to secure significant access to the
Single Market, without having to:
follow EU rules over which they have no real say pay into the EU accept EU citizens living and working in their country
A more limited trade deal with the EU would give the
UK less access to the Single
Market than we have now - including for services, which make up almost 8O% of the
UK economy. For example,
Canada’s deal with the EU will give limited access for services, it has so far been seven years in the making and is still not in force.
A vote to leave could mean a decade or more of uncertainty
Controlling immigration and securing our borders
Securing our borders
The UK is not part of the EU’s border-free zone - we control our own borders which gives us the right to check everyone, including EU nationals, arriving from continental Europe.
Immigration
The Government has negotiated a deal that will make our benefits system less of a draw for EU citizens.
In future, new EU migrants will not have full access to certain benefits until they have worked here for up to four years. The Government will have greater powers to take action where there is abuse of our immigration system.
Some argue that leaving the EU would give us more freedom to limit immigration.
But in return for the economic benefits of access to the
EU’s Single Market, nonEU countries - such as Norway - have had to accept the right of all EU citizens to live and work in their country.
Keeping us safer
EU membership means
UK police can use law enforcement intelligence from
27 EU countries, and will have access to fingerprint and DNA information.
EU cooperation makes it easier to keep criminals and terrorists out of the UK. Since
2OO4, using the European
Arrest Warrant, over l, OOO suspects have faced justice in UK courts and over 7, OOO have been extradited.
The UK is not part of the
European border-free zone. We control our own borders
The benefits of EU membership
The UK is part of the EU, a group of 28 countries which exists to promote economic security, peace and stability.
The EU operates as a single, free trading market, without taxes between borders.
The UK has secured a special status in the EU.
The UK has kept the pound, will not join the euro and has kept control of UK borders.
We have ensured that no UK powers can be transferred to the EU in the future without a referendum. The UK will keep full access to the Single
Market, with a say on its rules. For every £l paid in tax, a little over lp goes to the
EU. The Government judges that what the UK gets back in opportunities, job creation and economic security from
EU membership far outweighs the cost.
Opportunities for you and your children
EU membership means you and your family have the right to live, work or study abroad in any of the 27 other member countries. It also guarantees many employment rights.
The UK as a leading force in the world
The UK is a strong, independent nation. Our EU membership magnifies the
UK’s ability to get its way on the issues we care about.
EU action helped prevent
Iran from obtaining nuclear weapons; and the EU is leading the world on tackling climate change.
EU membership brings economic security, peace and stability
A once in a generation decision
The referendum on Thursday,
23rd June is your chance to decide if we should remain in or leave the European Union.
The Government believes it is in the best interests of the UK to remain in the EU.
This is the way to protect jobs, provide security, and strengthen the UK’s economy for every family in this country
- a clear path into the future, in contrast to the uncertainty of leaving.
This is your decision. The
Government will implement what you decide.
If you’re aged l8 or over by
23rd June and are entitled to vote, this is your chance to decide.
Registration ends on 7th
June. Find out how to register at Aboutmyvote. co. uk and register online at
Gov. uk/registerto-vote
If you would like to know more about any of the information in this leaflet, go to:
The EU referendum is a big decision for you and your family’s future
The Government believes that voting to remain in the European Union is the best decision for the UK.
Protecting jobs
A stronger economy
Providing security
The EU referendum is a once in a generation decision. The Government believes it is in you and your family’s best interests that the UK remains in the European Union.
Vote on Thursday, 23rd June 2Ol6.
If you would like further information, please visit the Government’s EU referendum website at