Our Contract
Our Contract with You with You
Britain Needs Reform and Reform UK Needs You
Britain has so much potential.
Our country is full of talent and energy.
Brexit is the opportunity of a lifetime.
The challenges we face are vast. Both Labour and Tory governments have broken promise after promise. They have destroyed trust in our democracy and betrayed the British people.
Our country is worse off, both financially and culturally. The economy is being wrecked by record high taxes, record high national debt, wasteful government spending and nanny state regulations.
Record mass immigration has damaged our country. The small boats crisis threatens our security. Multiculturalism has imported separate communities that reject our way of life. Divisive, ‘woke’ ideology has captured our public institutions. Transgender indoctrination is causing irreversible harm to children.
The unprecedented population explosion has pushed Britain to breaking point. There’s a housing crisis. A benefits crisis. Record crime.
Record NHS waiting lists. Wages are stagnating.
Net Zero has sent energy costs soaring. It is making us poorer and colder, damaging British industry and forcing drivers off the road.
The Tories have broken Britain. Labour will bankrupt Britain. A vote for either is a vote for more incompetence, dishonesty and defeat.
The two-party system has failed. We are ruled by an outof-touch political class who have turned their backs on our country.
But there is an alternative. The British people now have a common sense choice in Reform UK.
Our Contract with You is a serious plan to reshape the way our country is run. The government must work for the British people.
Not against them.
Only Reform UK will stand up for British culture, identity and values. We will freeze immigration and stop the boats. Restore law and order.
Repair our broken public services. Cut taxes to make work pay. End government waste and deliver our fully funded plan for zero NHS waiting lists. We will unlock Britain’s vast energy treasure of oil and gas to slash energy bills, beat the costof-living crisis and unleash real economic growth.
Once and for all, we will take back control over our borders, our money and our laws.
Only Reform UK will secure Britain’s future as a free, proud and independent sovereign nation.
Nigel Farage
Leader, Reform UK
Contents
Our Core Pledges to You 2
Immigration 3
Slash Government Waste 4
Economy - Personal 5
Economy - Business 6
NHS 7
Net Zero 8
Policing 9
Justice 10
Education 11
Benefits 12
Brexit 13
Defence 14
Housing 15
Children and Families 16
Transport and Infrastructure 17
Agriculture 18
Fisheries 19
Pensions and Social Care 2O
Constitutional Reform 21
Reclaiming Britain 22
Funding our Plans 23
Our Contract with You is not just another party manifesto. It sets out the reforms that
Britain needs in the first lOO days following a general election and thereafter. It has been produced with advice from a range of independent economists, think tanks and advisors on costs and savings.
Costings can be found at the end of each policy page. Some policy areas come with net costs and others with net savings. We have also included extra growth assumptions from our economic reforms. Final annualised budget calculations across a 5 year term of government can be found at the end of this Contract.
We are impatient for change. We are doers and achievers. Our Contract with You will be delivered by people with a real track record of success.
OUR CORE PLEDGES TO YOU
Fourteen years of Tory failure are coming to an end. A Labour government would ramp up mass immigration, crime, and taxes even further. Labour and the Tories are two sides of the same coin.
Only Reform UK is ready to stand up for common sense politics. We set out our plan in this document, Our Contract with You. Wherever you look, Britain needs Reform.
Our Contract with You covers the most important areas of policy for you and your family, but we have summarised these into five core pledges:
Imagine Smart Immigration, Not Mass Immigration
All non-essential immigration frozen to boost wages, protect public services, end the housing crisis and cut crime.
2.  Imagine No More Small Boats in the Channel
Illegal migrants who come to the UK will be detained and deported. And if needed, migrants in small boats will be picked up and taken back to France.
Imagine No NHS Waiting Lists
Still free at the point of delivery, healthcare needs reform to improve outcomes and enjoy zero NHS waiting lists. Cut back office waste to spend more money on the frontline. Tax breaks for doctors and nurses to tackle the staffing crisis.
4.  Imagine Good Wages for a Hard Day’s Work
Lift the income tax starting threshold to £2Ok to save the lowest paid £l,5OO per year. This takes 7 million of the least well-off out of Income Tax to make work pay and get people off benefits.
5.  Imagine Affordable, Stable Energy Bills
Scrap energy levies and Net Zero to slash energy bills and save each household
£5OO per year. Unlock Britain’s vast oil and gas reserves to beat the cost of living crisis and unleash real economic growth.
This is what
This is what
Reform UK MPs will
Reform UK MPs will fight hard for if elected.
fight hard for if elected.
So if you want change,
So if you want change, vote for it on July 4th.
vote for it on July 4th.
Vote Reform UK
Vote Reform UK to get reform.
to get reform.
Reform UK will secure Britain’s borders to protect wages, our public services, and British culture and values.
Freeze Non-Essential Immigration
Strict limits on immigration are the only way to relieve the pressure on our housing, public services, increase wages and protect our culture, identity and values. Essential skills, mainly around healthcare, must be the only exception.
Stop the Boats with our 4 Point Plan
Leave the European Convention on Human Rights.
Zero illegal immigrants to be resettled in the UK.
New Department of Immigration. Pick up illegal migrants out of boats and take them back to France.
Secure Detention for all Illegal Migrants
All asylum seekers that arrive illegally from safe countries will be processed rapidly, offshore if necessary. Those entering from a safe country will also be barred from claiming asylum or citizenship.
No legal aid for non-citizens. Those rejected will be returned.
Immediate Deportation for Foreign Criminals
Deport foreign nationals immediately after their prison sentence ends. Withdraw citizenship from immigrants who commit crime with the exception of some misdemeanour offences.
Bar Student Dependents
Introduce new visa rules for international students that bar dependents. Only international students with essential skills can remain in the UK. Close down fake courses and immigration schemes that abuse the rules.
Stop Health Tourism and Immediate Access to
Benefits
We will impose a requirement of 5 years residency and employment to claim any benefits in the UK.
The National Insurance rate will be raised to 2O% for foreign workers. This would incentivise businesses to employ British citizens whose National Insurance rate would stay at l3.8%. Essential foreign health and care workers would be exempt from the tax, as would businesses who employ 5 staff members and under. This would boost wages and could raise more than £2O billion over five years to pay for apprenticeships and training for young Brits.
IMMIGRATION PLEDGES SAVINGS
£5lO BILLION PA
£4BN PA
IMMIGRATION
Uncontrolled Immigration has Pushed Britain to
Breaking Point
“Securing our borders to boost your wages and protect public services and
British culture and values.”
Reform UK will slash wasteful spending to increase funding for frontline public services and reduce taxes for working people.
Bank of England Must Stop Paying Interest to
Commercial Banks on QE Reserves
This approach would save around £35 billion per year and has been endorsed by senior figures at the
Financial Times, New Economics Foundation, and
IFS, as well as two former Deputy Governors of the
Bank of England.
Save £5 in every £lOO
Every department must slash wasteful spending, cut bureaucracy, improve efficiency and negotiate better value procurement without touching frontline services. This will save £5O billion per year, ensure tax cuts and boost our economy.
Brexit Bonus. Cut Unnecessary Regulations
Britain still retains over 6,7OO EU laws. Government red tape and nanny state regulations are estimated to have cost the UK economy £l43 billion since 2Ol5.
That means £ billions lost in growth and taxes.
Cut Foreign Aid by 5O%
Save £6 billion from the £l2.8 billion budget. A major review is needed into the effectiveness of overseas aid. That includes global quangos to which we pay over £7 billion every year.
Collect £ Billions in Unpaid Tax
HM Revenue and Customs failed to collect tens of billions in taxes last year due to understaffing and bad management. Improved HMRC competence would deliver lower taxes to British workers.
SLASH GOVERNMENT WASTE:
POTENTIAL SAVINGS £9l BILLION PA
SLASH GOVERNMENT WASTE
Government Spending Needs
Major Reform
“Reform UK will make sure taxpayers’ money is never wasted.”
Reform UK will make work pay and help the unemployed to escape the benefits trap.
Make Work Pay. Lift the Income Tax Start
Point to £2O, OOO Per Year
This frees up to 7 million people from paying
Income Tax and saves every worker almost £l,5OO per year. Basic Tax rate stays at 2O%. The higher rate should begin at £7O, OOO.
Cut Energy Taxes, Beat the Costof-Living
Crisis
Save households over £5OO per year. Lower fuel duty by 2Op per litre for both residential and business users. Scrap VAT on energy bills. Scrap environmental levies.
Cut Residential Stamp Duty
Substantially boost economic activity and housebuilding by cutting Stamp Duty to O% below
£75Ok. Cut it to 2% from £75Ok - £l.5m and cut it to
4% over £l.5m.
Abolish the VAT Tourist Tax
The government has cost our economy over £lO billion when they stopped the VAT refund scheme for tourist shopping. This also deterred up to 2 million tourists.
Abolish Inheritance Tax (IHT) for all Estates
Under £2m
That means some 98% of all estates. The rate above
£2m will be 2O% tax, with the option to donate to charity instead.
ECONOMY - PERSONAL
Our Economy Needs Reform
“Reform UK will take 7 million people out of
Income Tax.”
COSTS £7O BILLION PA
Reform UK will back risk takers and wealth creators and make sure that Britain is open for business.
Free Over l.2 Million Small and Medium Sized
Businesses from Corporation Tax
Lift the minimum profit threshold to £lOOk. Reduce the main Corporation Tax Rate from 25% to 2O%, then to l5% from Year 3.
Abolish IR35 Rules to Support Sole Traders
Britain’s self-employed often work longer hours and take more risks. Many have no pension and receive no sick pay.
Lift the VAT Threshold to £l5O, OOO
Free up small entrepreneurs from red tape.
Support Small and Medium Sized Enterprises
(SMEs)
Abolish Business Rates for high street based SMEs.
Offset this with Online Delivery Tax at 4% for large, multinational enterprises to create a fairer playing field for high streets. Cut entrepreneurs’ tax to 5%.
Reform the Planning System
Fast-track new housing on brownfield sites and infrastructure projects to boost businesses, especially in coastal regeneration areas, Wales, the
North, and the Midlands.
Slash Red Tape to Boost Industry and Exports
Scrap thousands of laws that hold back British business and damage productivity, including employment laws. We must make it easier to hire and fire so that businesses can grow.
Reform the Tax System
Major simplification is needed. At over 2l, OOO pages, the UK’s tax code is a burden. Hong Kong’s tax code is under 5OO pages.
ECONOMY - BUSINESS
Our Economy Needs Reform
“Reform UK will back risk takers and wealth creators.”
COSTS £l8 BILLION PA
Despite record extra funding in recent years, NHS healthcare outcomes have declined. While still free at the point of delivery, our healthcare needs major reforms to improve results and enjoy zero waiting lists.
End Doctor and Nurse Shortages
All frontline NHS and social care staff to pay zero basic rate tax for 3 years. This will help retain existing staff and attract many who have left to return. End training caps for all UK medical students. Write off student fees pro rata per year over lO years of NHS service for all doctors, nurses and medical staff.
Use Independent Healthcare Capacity
We will harness independent and not-for-profit health provision in the UK and overseas.
Tax Relief of 2O% on all Private Healthcare and Insurance
This will improve care for all by relieving pressure on the NHS. Those who rely on the NHS will enjoy faster, better care. Independent healthcare capacity will grow rapidly, providing competition and reducing costs.
Put Patients in Charge With a New NHS
Voucher Scheme
NHS Patients will receive a voucher for private treatment if they can’t see a GP within 3 days.
For a consultant it would be 3 weeks. For an operation, 9 weeks. Services will always be free at the point of use.
Improve Efficiency. Cut Waste and
Unnecessary Managers
Operating theatres must be open on weekends.
Rotas must be planned further in advance. Nail down better prices using economies of scale.
Review all NHS Private Finance Contracts for significant savings potential. Charge those who fail to attend medical appointments without notice.
Abolish the NHS Race and Health Observatory.
Save A&E
Cut waiting times with a campaign of ‘Pharmacy
First, GP Second, A&E Last’. We will offer tax incentives for new pharmacies and those who employ more staff to assist in relieving pressure on A&E.
Excess Deaths and Vaccine Harms
Public Inquiry
Excess deaths are nearly as high as they were during the Covid pandemic. Young people are over-represented.
NHS
The NHS Needs Urgent Reform
“Patients first.
Rapid care.
Cutting waste - an NHS to be proud of again.”
NHS PLEDGES COSTS
£l7 BILLION PA
Net Zero is pushing up bills, damaging British industries like steel, and making us less secure.
We can protect our environment with more tree planting, more recycling and less single use plastics. New technology will help, but we must not impoverish ourselves in pursuit of unaffordable, unachievable global CO2 targets.
Scrap Net Zero and Related Subsidies
Ditching Net Zero could save the public sector over
£3O billion per year for the next 25 years.
Scrap Annual £lO Billion of Renewable Energy
Subsidies
Achieve this through equivalent taxes on them.
Renewables are not cheaper. Our bills have increased dramatically in line with the huge increase in renewables capacity over the last l5 years.
Cheap, Secure Energy for Britain
Start fast-track licences of North Sea gas and oil.
Grant shale gas licences on test sites for 2 years.
Enable major production when safety is proven, with local compensation schemes.
Cleaner Energy from New Technology
Fast-track clean nuclear energy with new Small
Modular Reactors, built in Britain. Increase and incentivise ethical UK lithium mining for electric batteries, combined cycle gas turbines, clean synthetic fuel, tidal power and explore clean coal mining.
NET ZERO
Net Zero is Crippling our Economy
“Reform UK will scrap Net
Zero to cut bills and restore growth.”
NET ZERO PLEDGES
SAVINGS £3O BILLION PA
Reform UK will restore Law and
Order on Britain’s streets and make sure that criminals face justice.
Commence Increase in Police Numbers
Recruitment to increase UK per capita police numbers to 3OO per lOOk population. That is 4O, OOO new front-line officers, over a 5year parliament.
Commence Zero Tolerance Policing
Clampdown on all crime and antisocial behaviour.
Increase Stop and Search substantially.
Prison for violent crimes and possessing a knife.
Drug dealing and trafficking will get mandatory life imprisonment. A new offence of Substantial
Possession of Drugs will meet heavy fines.
New Police Leadership and Recruitment
Regime
Strong preference for exmilitary officers and personnel. High standards of fitness and presentation for front line officers. Sack Chief
Constables that allow two-tier policing.
More Bobbies on the Beat
Ensure that police return to the beat and use better technology and stop wasting time on paperwork.
Allow PCSOs to become police officers before the role is phased out.
Common Sense Policing not ‘Woke’ Policing
Scrap all Diversity, Equality and Inclusion (DE&I) roles and regulations to stop two-tier policing.
Overhaul the Independent Office of Police Conduct
(IOPC) so that the police complaints system becomes more accountable and works for the lawabiding public.
DePoliticise the College of Policing
Prioritise crime prevention, discipline, public service and high standards of strength and fitness among trainees. Replace degree-standard entry with an entrance exam. Require officers to complete a 2year probationary period. Stricter entry requirements.
POLICING
Law and Order Urgently Needs Reform
“Zero tolerance policing. More police, higher standards”
POLICING PLEDGES COSTS
£3 BILLION PA
Reform UK will build a common sense justice system that punishes criminals and keeps the public safe.
Urgent Sentencing Review with Automatic
Life Imprisonment for Violent Repeat
Offenders
Those committing second violent or serious offences will receive mandatory life sentences.
Increase the Criminal Justice Budget
The budget is almost the same as it was lO years ago. Increase it from £lO billion to £l2 billion to ensure more high calibre staff to cut delays. Reopen local magistrates’ courts to clear the case backlog.
Change the Definition of Hate Crime
The CPS and police definition of a hate crime has led to systemic bias. Members of the British public must not be investigated because ‘any’ person
‘perceives’ that a hate crime has been committed.
Start Building of lO, OOO New Detention Places
Start expansion in capacity of state built and managed prisons so that life means life for those who endanger the public. Commission disused military bases if needed.
Reform the Child Maintenance Service
We will launch a special division of the Family
Court for maintenance and defaults. Share parental care 5O/5O where appropriate. Rights of access for grandparents.
Stop Child Grooming Gangs
Deport offenders holding dual citizenship. Make child grooming an aggravating offence. Improve safeguarding of victims and vulnerable. No bail for grooming gang offenders.
Tackle Youth Crime
Reopen High Intensity Training Camps for young offenders to teach basic education, teamwork and values.
JUSTICE
Our Justice System Needs Reform
“Reform UK will make sure that criminals face justice.”
JUSTICE PLEDGES COSTS
£2 BILLION PA
Reform UK wants an education system that ensures young people are proud of Britain and learn the skills, character and values to succeed in life.
A Patriotic Curriculum in Primary and
Secondary Schools
Any teaching about a period or example of British or European imperialism or slavery must be paired with the teaching of a non-European occurrence of the same to ensure balance. History and social science curriculum to be reviewed and audited regularly to ensure balance. Our children must be taught about their heritage.
Ban Transgender Ideology in Primary and
Secondary Schools
No gender questioning, social transitioning or pronoun swapping. Inform parents of under l6s about their children’s life decisions. Schools must have single sex facilities.
Tax relief of 2O% on all Independent Education
No VAT on Fees. If parents can afford to pay a bit more, we should incentivise them to choose independent schools. This will significantly ease pressure on state schools and improve education for all.
Scrap Interest on Student Loans
Extend loan capital repayment periods to 45 years.
Restrict undergraduate numbers well below current levels, too many courses are not good enough and students are being ripped off. Enforce minimum entry standards.
Cut Funding to Universities that Undermine
Free Speech
The government’s Free Speech Act is toothless.
Allowing political bias or cancel culture must face heavy financial penalties.
Permanent Exclusions for Violent and
Disruptive Students
We will double the number of Pupil Referral Units
(PRUs) so schools can function safely. We will also ensure that best practice is spread across PRUs.
Universities Must Provide 2Year
Undergraduate Courses
The option of 2year courses would reduce student debt and allow earlier entry into employment to help pay it off.
EDUCATION
Too Many Children and Young People are Being Badly Let Down
“Education that nurtures skills, character and values - not a divided society.”
EDUCATION PLEDGES
COSTS £5 BILLION PA
Reform UK will ensure those who can work do work.
Make Work Pay
Lifting the Income Tax start point to £2O, OOO per year means an extra £l,5OO per year. This would be a key incentive for those on benefits to find work.
Motivate up to 2 million People Back to Work
Reforms to benefit support and training will help people back into work. Particular focus on l634 year olds. Employment is critical to improving mental health. Tax relief for businesses that undertake apprenticeships.
Enforce a 2Strike Rule for Job Offers
All job seekers and those fit to work must find employment within 4 months or accept a job after
2 offers. Otherwise, benefits are withdrawn.
Face to Face, Not Remote Assessments for Benefits
Personal Independence Payment and Work
Capability Assessment should be face to face.
We will require independent medical assessments to prove eligibility for payments. Those registered with severe disabilities or serious long-term illnesses would be exempt from regular checks.
BENEFITS
The Benefits System is Broken
“In Britain, if you can work, you must work.”
BENEFITS PLEDGES
SAVINGS £l5 BILLION PA
Reform UK will do what the
Tories have failed to - grasp the huge opportunities of Brexit
Legislate to Scrap EU Regulations with
Immediate Effect
Britain still has over 6,7OO retained EU laws, which we will rescind. British laws on State Aid,
Competition, Employment, Net Zero and the
Environment are still based on EU regulations.
Abandon the Windsor Framework
This is worse than the original Northern Ireland
Protocol. The UK has been partitioned down the
Irish Sea. Northern Ireland is still in the EU’s single market for goods. It is unacceptable that British citizens in Northern Ireland are being ruled by
EU laws.
Independence for Britain’s Armed Forces
The government has signed up to the EU Horizon programme. That means we send money to the
European Defence Fund and part of the EU’s military mobility project. Our Armed Forces are at risk of being sucked into an EU Command and
Control Force.
Prepare for Renegotiations on the EU Trade and Cooperation Agreement
A socalled EU ‘level playing field’ is holding us back.
BREXIT
Brexit Means Taking Back Control of our Borders, Money and Laws
“Reform UK will unlock the major opportunities of Brexit.”
Reform UK will ensure our servicemen and women have the resources they need to defend our nation and that they are respected and supported after they leave the services.
Increase Defence Spending to 2.5% of National
GDP by year 3, then 3% within 6 years
This will increase the size and capacity of our armed forces and ensure our lead role in NATO.
It will also improve equipment, quality of life for services personnel and boost morale in military
Introduce Urgent Pay Review
Increase basic pay across our armed forces to boost recruitment and retention. It is unacceptable that a private soldier is paid less than an Amazon worker.
Introduce new Armed Forces Justice Bill
Protect our servicemen and women on active duty inside and outside the UK from civil law and human rights lawyers. The bill will also create an armed forces watchdog to fast-track complaints and appeals in housing and welfare.
New, Dedicated Ministerial Department for
Veterans
A properly funded and resourced whole department is essential to guarantee no veteran goes without and that our former servicemen and women play a leading role in our society and economy.
Recruit 3O, OOO for the army
Military national service for 3O, OOO young people for one year is not the answer. We need to recruit
3O, OOO to join the army full time
Regenerate Britain’s Defence Manufacturing and Technology
Introduce incentives and tax breaks to boost the
UK defence industry. Improve equipment selfsufficiency and manufacture world class products for export.
Reform Defence Procurement
Launch a Joint Acquisition Corp to ensure world class procurement. The Ministry of Defence must listen to soldiers on the front line and ensure they get the equipment they need.
Education for Military Personnel
Free education both during and after service is vital to ensure a successful return to civilian life.
DEFENCE
Britain has some of the Best and
Bravest Armed Forces in the World
“Reform UK will strengthen our armed forces and empower our veterans.”
DEFENCE PLEDGES
COSTS £l4 BILLION PA
Reform UK will ensure that people can own their own home by unleashing housebuilding across the country and cutting immigration.
Review the Planning System
Fast-track planning and tax incentives for development of brownfield sites. ‘Loose fit planning’ policy for large residential developments with preapproved guidelines and developer requirements.
Reform Social Housing Law
Prioritise local people and those who have paid into the system. Foreign nationals must go to the back of the queue. Not the front.
Scrap section 24 for Landlords
The tax system should encourage smaller landlords into the rental markets. Not penalise them. We will restore landlords’ rights to deduct finance costs and mortgage interest from tax on rental income.
Abolish the Renters’ (Reform) Bill
Existing legislation was inadequate to address bad practices. Instead, we will boost the monitoring, appeals and enforcement process for renters with grievances.
Protection for Leaseholders
All potential charges for leasehold or freehold residents must be clearly stated and consented to. Enforce Section lO6 agreements. Ensure it is cheaper and easier to extend leases to 99O years and buy freeholds.
Incentivise Use of New Construction
Technology
We will incentivise innovation to speed up building:
modular construction, digital technology and building sites that improve efficiency and cut waste.
HOUSING
Britain has a Housing Crisis
“Affordable homes for hard-working
British people.”
HOUSING PLEDGES
COSTS £ NEUTRAL
Reform UK believes that strong families are the bedrock of a thriving society - we will support family formation and give parents back control.
Support Marriage Through the Tax System
As soon as finances allow, introduce a UK 25% transferable marriage tax allowance. This would mean no tax on the first £25, OOO of income for either spouse. This will help make work pay and incentivise people trapped on benefits back into the workplace.
Choice for Stayat-Home Mums or Dads
The majority of mothers would choose to stay at home more if they could. Front-loading the Child
Benefit system for children aged l4 would give parents the choice to spend more time with their children.
Mandate Single Sex Spaces
Public toilets and changing areas must provide single sex facilities.
Promote Child Friendly App Restricted
Smartphones
Social media is associated with eating disorders, anxiety, depression, suicide and the child mental health crisis. Launch an inquiry into social media harms.
Review the Online Safety Bill
Social media giants that push baseless transgender ideology and divisive Critical Race theory should have no role in regulating free speech.
CHILDREN AND FAMILIES
Britain has one of the
Highest Family Breakdown
Rates in the Western World
“Putting families first.
Britain’s future depends on our young people.”
CHILDREN & FAMILIES PLEDGES
COSTS £8 BILLION PA
Reform UK will take a pragmatic approach to getting Britain’s infrastructure back on its feet and keeping it secure from foreign threats.
Scrap HS2
Save £25 billion by scrapping the rest of this bloated vanity project.
Stop the War on Drivers
Legislate to ban ULEZ Clean Air Zones and Low
Traffic Neighbourhoods. Scrapping Net Zero means no more bans on petrol and diesel cars and no legal requirements for manufacturers to sell electric cars.
We will keep the speed limit low where safety is critical. Otherwise, 2O MPH zones will be scrapped.
Accelerate Transport Infrastructure
Focus on our coastal regions, Wales, the North, and the Midlands. Improve existing rail and road links.
Integrated services are critical.
Tighter Regulation and New Ownership Model for Critical National Infrastructure
The British taxpayer needs to be in control of
Britain’s utilities. Launch a new model that brings 5O% of each utility into public ownership.
The other 5O% would be owned by UK pension funds, benefiting from new expertise and better management. We will ensure standing charges are capped to help low users and pensioners.
A Single Government Infrastructure Funding
Stream
Overhaul and merge the National Infrastructure
Commission and the Infrastructure Bank. Scrap Net
Zero objectives. Simplify the funding process to save time, cut waste, boost funding and accountability.
TRANSPORT & UTILITIES INFRASTRUCTURE
The Scandal of our Crumbling
Infrastructure Must End
“Reform UK has the vision to transform
Britain’s broken infrastructure.”
TRANSPORT AND UTILITIES
INFRASTRUCTURE PLEDGES
SAVINGS £25 BILLION ONE-OFF
£5 BILLION PER YEAR
OVER FIRST 5 YEARS
AGRICULTURE
British Farming Needs Reform to
Take Advantage of Brexit
“Reform UK will put British agriculture back on its feet.”
AGRICULTURE PLEDGES
COSTS £2 BILLION PA
Reform UK will revitalise Britain’s agriculture to give a muchneeded boost to our farmers and guarantee the country’s food security.
Increase the Farming Budget to £3 Billion
Focus on smaller farms. Keep farmland in use. Bring young people into farming. Boost rural economy and culture. Increase innovation and diversification.
Help farmers to farm, not pay them to leave or retire.
Scrap Climate-Related Farming Subsidies
Productive land must be farmed, not be used for solar farms or rewilding. Replace current subsidies with direct payments. Stop Natural England from taking action that damages farmers.
Protect Country Sports
These increase investment and help conservation of our environment. They boost rural jobs, communities and local economies.
Stop Supermarket Price Fixing
Grant powers to the Competitions and Markets
Authority to ensure fair pricing. Help farmers sell their produce directly to the public. Change planning laws to support farm shops with zero business rates.
Buy British. Buy Quality
Target 7O% to ensure food security. Taxpayer funded organisations should source 75% of their food from the UK. Clear labelling for consumer choice. Boost smaller food processors and abattoirs through tax breaks and other incentives.
Farming not Form Filling
Many farmers spend over l5 hours a week on paperwork. Cut red tape from HMRC and the
British Cattle Movement Service.
Reform UK will seize the huge opportunity to renew our fishing industry and revive our coastal
Stop EU Fishers Taking UK Quotas
End automatic access to UK waters. Every foreign fishing vessel must pay for a licence to gain access to the UK’s 2OO nautical mile Exclusive Economic
Zone (EEZ), as designated under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). Stop
Foreign Owners using British flags of convenience.
Quota reforms needed to help small scale fishing.
Expand the Royal Navy Overseas Patrol
Squadron
Police Britain’s 2OO nautical mile EEZ properly.
Assess the possibility of creating a dedicated coast guard or fisheries protection agency.
Ban Foreign Supertrawlers from UK Waters
Extend the ban on pair trawling for bass beyond the
South East and l2mile territorial waters. Ban Dutch vessels from electric pulse fishing in Britain’s 2OO mile EEZ.
Rebuild UK Fish Processing
Tax and other incentives to ensure that all fish caught in British waters are landed and processed in the UK. Fish caught by foreign vessels in UK waters should also be landed and processed here when capacity allows.
Revitalise the UK’s Fishing Fleet
Tax incentives and vocational training to increase
UK fishing fleets. Include fishing communities in policy making.
Guarantee Sustainable Stocks
Implement a ‘dynamic management system’.
Work with national and regional partners such as the North East Atlantic Fisheries Commission.
FISHING & COASTAL COMMUNITIES
The Government has Betrayed
Britain’s Fishing Industry
“Reviving our coastal
Revitalising our fishing industry.”
FISHING AND COASTAL COMMUNITIES
PLEDGES COSTS £2 BILLION PA
Reform UK will ensure that our elderly people can live with dignity through long-term reforms funded by a growing economy.
Commence Royal Commission of Inquiry into
Social Care System
A national plan is critical for a sustainable social care system. The sector needs flexibility, tax incentives, VAT breaks and less waste. Simplify social care through a single funding stream, instead of the split between NHS and Local
Authorities. More funding will be needed when a national plan is agreed.
Stop the Offshore Taxpayer Rip Off
Some larger care home providers are avoiding tax on hundreds of millions of profits through complex offshore property company structures and high interest shareholder loans. This has to end.
Review Pension Provision
The current pension system is riddled with complexity, huge cost and poor returns leading to less uptake. Countries like Australia do savings and pensions much better and cheaper than we do and from a much younger age.
End the Mineworkers Pension Scandal
We accept the Business, Energy and Industrial
Strategy Committee 2O2l recommendations in full to amend the Mineworkers Pension Scheme arrangements so that all the scheme surpluses accrue to the Mineworkers.
PENSIONS AND SOCIAL CARE
Our Elderly Deserve to be Treated with Dignity and Respect
“Reform UK will treat our elderly with the respect they deserve.”
We will end the corruption of our government and politics by an outof-touch, Londoncentric elite to make Britain a more democratic, accountable, and therefore more prosperous nation.
Leave the European Convention on Human
Rights
Commence reform of the Human Rights Act so that it puts the rights of law-abiding people first.
Commence Reform of the House of Lords &
Civil Service
Replace the crony-filled House of Lords with a much smaller, more democratic second chamber.
Structure to be debated. Immediate end of political appointees. Replace Civil Service leaders with successful professionals from the private sector, who are political appointees, who come and go with the government.
Commence Reform of the Postal Voting
System
Postal voting has allowed electoral fraud. We will stop postal voting except for the elderly, disabled or those who can’t leave their homes.
Proportional Representation Voting for the
House of Commons
Large numbers of voters have no representation in parliament and new parties are shut out of the political system. Voter turnout could be some lO% higher with PR. A referendum is needed.
A British Bill of Rights
Our freedoms must be codified and guaranteed.
Never again can our entire country be locked down on shoddy evidence and lies. Our data and privacy must be protected. Surveillance of the public must be limited and those monitoring us held to account.
CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM
Britain’s Constitutional
Arrangements Need Reform
“Reform UK will make Britain a fully sovereign, democratic nation.”
CONSTITUTIONAL REFORM
PLEDGES £ NEUTRAL
Reform UK will uphold British values and legislate against extremist forces that seek to undermine our way of life.
Reaffirm British Sovereignty
Reject the influence of the World Economic Forum.
Reject the World Health Organisation (WHO)
Pandemic Treaty and cancel our membership of the WHO unless there is fundamental reform to its structure and funding. Reform UK also opposes the
Creation of a Central Bank Digital Currency (CBDC).
We oppose a cashless society.
Replace the 2OlO Equalities Act
The Equalities Act requires discrimination in the name of ‘positive action’. We will scrap
Diversity, Equality and Inclusion (DE&I) rules that have lowered standards and reduced economic productivity.
Propose a Comprehensive Free Speech Bill
Legislate to stop left-wing bias and politically correct ideology that threatens personal freedom and democracy. No more debanking, cancel culture, left wing hate mobs or political bias in public institutions. Stop Sharia law being used in the UK.
Commence Reform of the BBC
The outof-touch wasteful BBC is institutionally biased. The TV licence is taxation without representation. We will scrap it. In a world of ondemand TV People should be free to choose.
Make St George’s and St David’s Day a
Public Holiday
English national identity should be officially promoted and celebrated, not ignored or banned.
Launch an Anti-Corruption Unit for
Westminster
We will ensure that public officials face sanctions if they break the rules, including prison. Our new
Anti-Corruption Unit will have legal powers to investigate past and future scandals.
RECLAIMING BRITAIN
Reform is Needed to
Defend and Promote
British Culture, Identity and Values
“Upholding
British culture, identity, and values.”
RECLAIMING BRITAIN
PLEDGES £ NEUTRAL
FUNDING OF REFORM UK
PLANS
SAVINGS PLEDGES
Annualised Savings Over 5 Year
Electoral Term Amount in £ billions
Immigration Savings
Energy Savings - tax subsidies & scrap Net
Zero
£3O
Benefit Saving - l million plus back to work
£l5
Transport & Utilities Savings
Slash wasteful Government spending
Save £5 in lOO incl govt depts. quangos, commissions
£5O
Stop bank interest on QE reserves
£35
Cut foreign aid by 5O%
Sub-Total Potential Savings £l5O billion pa Almost £3, OOO per Adult
EXTRA GROWTH ASSUMPTION
Energy Pledges
Brexit Pledges
Overall
Proposals will create l - l.5% extra growth pa
Extra l% pa GDP £25 bn
Tax @ 4O% spend £lO bn
Total Extra Growth Assumption £lO billion pa of extra tax revenues
TOTAL SAVINGS and EXTRA GROWTH POTENTIAL £l6O BILLION PA
COST PLEDGES
Annualised Cost Over 5 Year
Electoral Term Amount in £ billions
£7O
£l8
NHS Pledges
£l7
Policing Pledges
Justice Pledges
Education Pledges
Defence Pledges
£l4
Children and Families Pledges
Agriculture Pledges
Fishing and Coastal Communities Pledges
TOTAL COST £l4l BILLION